on new year's day xxx a cute little pilgrim xxx at the gate 
xxxxxx new year's day xxx this world of japan's xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx everywhere, a corrupt world's xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx basking xxx in the new year's sun... xxx my trashy hut 
xxxxxx around noon xxx new year's day begins... xxx little hut 
xxxxxx no run-of-the-mill xxx new year's day xxx for the slob 
xxxxxx no customary xxx new year's day xxx for the slob 
xxxxxx first month, second day, xxx my wrinkled xxx hands 
xxxxxx first month, xxx recording the cash spent xxx on sake 
xxxxxx on the cat's grave xxx in first month... xxx dried sardines 
xxxxxx to one side xxx of my paper lantern... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx at my hut xxx what will come of it? xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx spring's first dawn, xxx the priest pretending xxx to sweep 
xxxxxx amazing, xxx in the house i was born xxx spring's first morning 
xxxxxx amazing, xxx in the house i was born xxx seeing this moon 
xxxxxx amazing, xxx in the house i was born xxx spring begins today 
xxxxxx even for this body of dust xxx a guardian god! xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx even for me xxx there's a guardian god! xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx now begins xxx the future buddha's reign... xxx spring pines 
xxxxxx spring at my hut, xxx tall as a sleeping man xxx the mist 
xxxxxx spring begins xxx as it has deigned to do xxx for a thousand ages 
xxxxxx my province, xxx even the smoke xxx an ancient thing 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx sparrows at my gate xxx with healthy faces 
xxxxxx from where the gods live xxx miwa's xxx sunrise 
xxxxxx from a neighbor's storehouse xxx shining slantwise... xxx year's first sun 
xxxxxx from the storehouse xxx shining slantwise... xxx year's first sun 
xxxxxx rising into xxx the year's first sky... xxx tea smoke 
xxxxxx if it's not raining xxx it's the year's first sky! xxx tomorrow too, travel 
xxxxxx forming the year's xxx first sky... xxx tea smoke 
xxxxxx welcoming in loads xxx of new year's rain... xxx trashy house 
xxxxxx big field, xxx my new year's walk xxx follows holes made by canes 
xxxxxx o new year's god xxx this year too xxx send help! 
xxxxxx plum blossoms fall xxx in the hairdo... xxx lowering the basket 
xxxxxx sickle moon, xxx hauling up the basket xxx through branches 
xxxxxx a fast day, xxx drawn by the uproar xxx to ueno 
xxxxxx servant on holiday, xxx the mountain festival xxx ended yesterday 
xxxxxx on the homecoming servant's xxx face too... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx servants' holiday, xxx two in a row xxx on meditation bridge 
xxxxxx the servants' holiday xxx in full swing! xxx meditation bridge 
xxxxxx yanking up a little pine xxx he watches xxx the watchers 
xxxxxx in formal trousers xxx curled asleep on the lawn... xxx first day of rat 
xxxxxx pruned by the antelope's xxx jaws... xxx new year's pine 
xxxxxx here and there xxx hanging in the thicket... xxx new year's ropes 
xxxxxx going outside xxx plum blossoms dive in... xxx my lucky tea 
xxxxxx my shadow too xxx in good health... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx my ramshackle hut xxx just as it is... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx how many times xxx a new year's gift? xxx the fan returns 
xxxxxx making the rounds xxx as a new year's gift... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx my humble hut, xxx all morning they come xxx for new year's gifts 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx all morning they come by xxx for new year's gifts 
xxxxxx new year's gift of tea, xxx where did you go xxx on your journey back to me? 
xxxxxx the naughty child xxx attempts first... xxx year's first writing 
xxxxxx treasured child, xxx his cane dragging xxx the year's first writing 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even in mountain shade xxx new year's water 
xxxxxx first hot bath, xxx for my journey's lice xxx first sin 
xxxxxx into the year's first xxx water softly... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx making a face xxx at the whining cat... xxx bouncing her ball 
xxxxxx broken kite dancing xxx 'round and 'round... xxx ocha-no-mizu 
xxxxxx hugging his kite xxx soon he's sound asleep... xxx the child 
xxxxxx lion puppet at the gate, xxx from his mouth xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx teeth to harden xxx this new year's meal... xxx not even one 
xxxxxx new year's tooth-hardening xxx meal...the cat wins xxx and laughs 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx a mountain monk peeks xxx through a fence 
xxxxxx the grass and wheat xxx tottering... xxx sunlight stretches on 
xxxxxx water spider xxx on spring's last day... xxx laughing face 
xxxxxx spring departs, xxx the old clothes buyer xxx ignores me 
xxxxxx light snow, xxx a dog digs a hole xxx by the road 
xxxxxx the little crow xxx slips so cleverly... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx taking it easy xxx the mouse sleeps too... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx half of it xxx is flitting snowflakes... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the priest is mending xxx a rip... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx growing side by side xxx whispering pines 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx at night, too, making love xxx on mount matchi 
xxxxxx night sermon xxx backsliding gamblers... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx rice cake with bean paste xxx for the crossroads buddha... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a female servant's xxx short sword 
xxxxxx faces of devils xxx faces of foxes... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx inside my umbrella-hat xxx a charm from ise shrine... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx the spring breeze pushes xxx somebody xxx down the slope 
xxxxxx while the spring breeze blows xxx a healing xxx bath 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the round reed hut's xxx one door 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the priest gives his sermon xxx walking along 
xxxxxx out of the dyer's-weed xxx it blows... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx hazy moon in the pine, xxx passing through xxx passing through 
xxxxxx a lucky fox xxx deigns to bark... xxx hazy moon 
xxxxxx rap-a-tap xxx who's that coming xxx in the mist? 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx living in mist... xxx little house 
xxxxxx in the misty day xxx not growing older... xxx grave tablets 
xxxxxx in spring mist xxx from morning on a ruckus... xxx foolish crow 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx behind the big inn xxx a pine 
xxxxxx farewell! farewell! xxx hands waving xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx waving umbrella-hats xxx farewell! farewell! xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx well hidden xxx by the spring mist... xxx grave tablet 
xxxxxx the lake is slowly xxx lost in mist... xxx evening falls 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx missing a child xxx the parent's face 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx having lost a child xxx the bird's face 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx a field mouse chased xxx by the dog 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx to the top of the weed xxx a wet mouse 
xxxxxx float away xxx my snow too... xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx take my snow too xxx into your flow... xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx before the gate, xxx my cane makes a river xxx of melting snow 
xxxxxx melting the big snow xxx with a spoon... xxx a child 
xxxxxx mother dog xxx testing the depth... xxx snow-melt river 
xxxxxx garden at the gate, xxx forming the word "rice" xxx the melted snow 
xxxxxx garden at the gate, xxx with my cane digging xxx a snow-melt river 
xxxxxx my gate's adornment, xxx the rice seedlings xxx turning green 
xxxxxx in honor of the equinox xxx the hedge xxx turns green 
xxxxxx heading for my sleeve xxx to play... xxx spring equinox louse 
xxxxxx a migrating servant xxx laid off... xxx his sixty year-old face 
xxxxxx some stay behind xxx in the green leaves... xxx low tide crows 
xxxxxx the crane and the tortoise's xxx playground... xxx burnt field 
xxxxxx windblown clouds, xxx the fires of burning fields xxx bring sunset 
xxxxxx when this pine sapling xxx grows to flower... xxx who'll be here? 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx his face so innocent xxx comes home 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx licking his chops xxx comes home 
xxxxxx on his whisker tips xxx rice grains tremble... xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx snap! the buck's antlers xxx come off 
xxxxxx baby sparrow, xxx even when people come xxx opening his mouth 
xxxxxx the bird's nest, too xxx in the unlucky direction... xxx mount hie 
xxxxxx the baby sparrow xxx chirps inside it... xxx rice gourd 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx not at all concerned... xxx tea smoke 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx not at all concerned... xxx gambling at the crossroads 
xxxxxx the nightingale's xxx "i'm perfect" face... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even while pooping, sings xxx lotus sutra 
xxxxxx even among nightingales xxx royalty xxx on the fence 
xxxxxx the dragnet of nightingales xxx closes in... xxx police station 
xxxxxx many generations xxx had your face, nightingale... xxx deep shinano 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx is bouncing about... xxx well bucket 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx splashes too... xxx purification font 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx from one corner to another xxx his searching eyes 
xxxxxx evening lark, xxx which pine island's xxx good for sleeping? 
xxxxxx even the field's xxx radishes blooming... xxx the lark singing! 
xxxxxx ripples on water, xxx mingling with the larks xxx a fishing boat 
xxxxxx "i won't fall xxx in the lake!" xxx the lark sings 
xxxxxx from the rice cake tub xxx from the pine... xxx skylarks 
xxxxxx from the grave xxx and from the flowerpot... xxx skylarks! 
xxxxxx looking at me xxx the pheasant on tiptoe xxx on tiptoe 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries xxx in the burned field, look! xxx an ancient pine 
xxxxxx peeking into xxx the grassy meadow... xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx the bright moon in raindrops xxx from the eaves... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx a goose without companions xxx flying fast as he can xxx returns 
xxxxxx up to today xxx such perserverance and strength! xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx up to today xxx such great perserverance... xxx wild geese! wild geese! 
xxxxxx geese honking, xxx now they leave behind xxx japan 
xxxxxx after seeing rice planting xxx in remote provinces... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx thinking of taking off? xxx goose on tiptoe xxx on tiptoe 
xxxxxx old pond, xxx "let me go first!" xxx jumping frog 
xxxxxx old pond, xxx a frog-jumping-into-water xxx sound 
xxxxxx now they're quarreling xxx the croaking xxx frogs 
xxxxxx pale green xxx sitting down with a thump... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx the big nettle tree xxx as his shield... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx in holy jizo's lap xxx squatting, croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx taming the flesh xxx he enters a shrine... xxx frog 
xxxxxx in the open window xxx a bright moon xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx the uproar in the servants' room xxx beats the frogs... xxx drinking party 
xxxxxx the uproar in the servants' room xxx wins out... xxx new year's toasts 
xxxxxx squatting on the head xxx of a sleeping cow... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx on the flower pot xxx does the butterfly, too xxx hear buddha's promise? 
xxxxxx drinking tea alone, xxx every day the butterfly xxx stops by 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx even shinran's pine xxx seems to know 
xxxxxx butterfly departs, xxx even shinran's pine xxx seems to know 
xxxxxx sharing tree shade xxx with a butterfly... xxx friends in a previous life 
xxxxxx baby in a basket, xxx licking the edge of her mouth xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx creeping through xxx the rice farmer's legs... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx garden butterfly, xxx the child crawls, it flies xxx crawls, it flies... 
xxxxxx butterfly at the gate, xxx the child crawls, it flies xxx crawls, it flies... 
xxxxxx first butterfly, xxx without formal greeting xxx entering the alcove 
xxxxxx evening xxx is such a downer... xxx meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx in this world xxx from dawn to dusk xxx even a butterfly must toil 
xxxxxx the whole house xxx pays them court... xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx they are soothed xxx by the whole family xxx silkworms... 
xxxxxx quickly people xxx pay them court... xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx in a hasty manner xxx they are soothed xxx silkworms... 
xxxxxx don't be mean xxx to that horsefly xxx skylight! 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx pond snails singing xxx in the kettle 
xxxxxx snails shriek xxx in the ringing kettle xxx neither knows the other 
xxxxxx o clams xxx meet the geese and gulls xxx of greater kamakura! 
xxxxxx bush clover sprouting, xxx when people aren't looking xxx the deer eats 
xxxxxx pricking people, xxx new grasses of the plain xxx are precocious! 
xxxxxx wiping their feet xxx on the baby grass... xxx doorway 
xxxxxx baby grass, xxx the stylish woman leaves xxx her butt print 
xxxxxx fallen blossoms, xxx the stylish woman leaves xxx her butt print 
xxxxxx in my province xxx grass blooms too... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx my province, xxx even the grass blooms xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx in flowering mustard xxx step by step sinking... xxx sun 
xxxxxx a visitor views xxx the field of rape... xxx villa shed 
xxxxxx flowering mustard, xxx and looking west xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx drunk on sake xxx he yanks xxx the radish 
xxxxxx the radish xxx is yanked out xxx by mr. drunkard 
xxxxxx the radish xxx by mr. drunkard xxx is yanked out 
xxxxxx the tree buds, too xxx open up... xxx amida's hongan temple 
xxxxxx north beach's xxx sand-barrier camellias xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx the setting place xxx for the spring sun... xxx wisteria blossoms 
xxxxxx blooming plum, xxx the voices of children xxx sound reverent 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx riding a dog xxx the golden boy 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx riding a dog xxx the peach boy 
xxxxxx red plum blossoms, xxx on the porch xxx the bathed cat dries 
xxxxxx the family's good fortune xxx in bloom... xxx plum tree at the gate 
xxxxxx gate's plum tree, xxx the family's good fortune xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx even the black lacquered xxx horse is glittering! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the cloth monkey xxx in high spirits... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx at the fox's hole xxx red beans and rice 
xxxxxx plum tree, xxx on my hut's unlucky side xxx blooming! 
xxxxxx plum in full bloom, xxx a house without sake xxx can't be found 
xxxxxx plum in full bloom... xxx no house in the world xxx without sake 
xxxxxx even the heavenly gods xxx crowd 'round... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in my gate xxx thrust out, swaying xxx plum branch 
xxxxxx the first and best xxx of shitaya ward... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx abandoned fan, xxx i return it xxx to the plum blossom thief 
xxxxxx not giving a damn xxx that plum blossoms fall... xxx his stern face 
xxxxxx the bird is singing xxx but it ain't blooming... xxx plum tree 
xxxxxx in the thicket xxx the plum blossoms scatter xxx languidly 
xxxxxx two voices that sound alike xxx make their way... xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx honestly, xxx even more than blossoms xxx i love dumplings! 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx under every tree xxx a buddha on display 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx even the stone buddhas xxx parents and children 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx even the holy jizos xxx parents and children 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx around grandpa's waist xxx a name tag 
xxxxxx around the old man's waist xxx blossom viewing... xxx a name tag 
xxxxxx sky-blue parasols xxx one by one... xxx blossoms at their peak 
xxxxxx sky-blue parasols xxx one by one... xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx onto the paper amulet xxx cherry blossoms xxx scatter 
xxxxxx fussing, fussing xxx in the blossom shade... xxx gamblers 
xxxxxx when cherry blossoms xxx scatter... xxx no regrets 
xxxxxx without regret xxx they fall and scatter... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx simply trust! xxx cherry blossoms flitting xxx down 
xxxxxx curled to sleep, xxx the important official xxx in cherry blossom shade 
xxxxxx my dirty blossom-viewing xxx robe... xxx i look like kyorai! 
xxxxxx my blossom-viewing umbrella-hat... xxx but all day xxx straw sandals in such a state! 
xxxxxx a vegetable hodgepodge xxx on butterbur leaves... xxx cherry blossom shade 
xxxxxx rap-a-tap xxx who's that coming xxx to view the blossoms? 
xxxxxx rap-a-tap xxx who's that coming xxx in the mist? 
xxxxxx carrying his mother xxx and leading his child by the hand... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx "no soldiers xxx allowed!" xxx say the cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry trees in bloom, xxx yet some people xxx are tired of it 
xxxxxx the home village xxx i abandoned... xxx cherry trees in bloom 
xxxxxx grandma's rice cakes xxx and papa's cherry tree xxx in bloom! 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms xxx i waited and waited for... xxx countryside 
xxxxxx o cherry blossoms xxx fall! fall! xxx enough to fill my belly 
xxxxxx a thousand gallons xxx shower from the eaves... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx even an old man xxx has new year's eyes... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx gate's cherry tree xxx all this flit-flit flitting xxx is work! 
xxxxxx a hearty meal xxx of great japan's rice... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx without you, xxx the cherry blossoms xxx just blossoms 
xxxxxx without you, xxx the grove xxx is just a grove 
xxxxxx cherry trees in bloom, xxx warmed by a brazier xxx blossom-gazing 
xxxxxx trickling from xxx a village child's sleeve... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the master being dead xxx just ordinary... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms fall, xxx come out and play xxx devil in me! 
xxxxxx blossoming mountain, xxx come out and play xxx devil in me! 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx even the devil in me xxx has lost his horns 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms fall, xxx come out and play xxx devil in me! 
xxxxxx in falling cherry blossoms xxx growling to amida buddha... xxx temple dog 
xxxxxx the neighbor expresses xxx his condolences... xxx late-blooming cherry tree 
xxxxxx lying down in a row, xxx discussing the distant xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx lying down in a row, xxx discussing xxx the distant storm 
xxxxxx lording over xxx the farm field... xxx a cherry tree in bloom 
xxxxxx a corrupt world xxx in its latter days... xxx but cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx shinano's deep wooded mountains xxx even in fifth month... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx pouring onto xxx the faces of sinners... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx peach blossoms, xxx riding a dog xxx the naughty boy 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx riding a dog xxx the peach boy 
xxxxxx keeping their cool, xxx the crow xxx the willow 
xxxxxx the sleeping puppy xxx paws xxx at the willow 
xxxxxx the willow at my gate xxx droops xxx just because 
xxxxxx to the old woman xxx doing laundry, the evening xxx willow bows 
xxxxxx waking from sleep, xxx drip-dripping willow xxx in the night 
xxxxxx cemetery font, xxx the willow at the gate xxx bathes 
xxxxxx moon to the right xxx water to the left... xxx the evening willow 
xxxxxx water rising, xxx the shrimp crawls up xxx the willow 
xxxxxx peeking out xxx from the willow tree... xxx face of a fox 
xxxxxx waking from summer sleep, xxx moon gazing xxx on the levee 
xxxxxx summer night, xxx the moon by the river xxx just a sliver 
xxxxxx in the summer night xxx it's a pillow... xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx popping open xxx in the short summer night... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx hot night in the trees, xxx i'm getting used to it xxx arm for a pillow 
xxxxxx today too, heat xxx and tomorrow, more heat? xxx house in the trees 
xxxxxx quiet and still xxx i eat my white rice... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx from the barnyard grass xxx at the gate, rising... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx cooling under the eaves xxx and just as cool... xxx birdsong 
xxxxxx facing the cool breeze xxx straight on... xxx a lake 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx "third month has passed!' xxx sings the bird 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx through my neighbor's bamboo xxx just a remnant 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx through my neighbor's pine xxx just a remnant 
xxxxxx morning cool, xxx fishing for soup stock xxx in his back door sea 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx my wife chases a mosquito xxx with a spoon 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx he beckons with his fan xxx a rain of golden coins 
xxxxxx three raindrops xxx a greeting card from heaven... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx this rain xxx a greeting card from heaven... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx in a mountain field at night xxx voices 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx tucked among bamboo... xxx farmhouse 
xxxxxx vines today xxx morning-glories tomorrow... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx a small child xxx a bundle of hay on his back... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a beggar with his potted xxx pine 
xxxxxx showing off xxx with a cloudburst... xxx mountain's water 
xxxxxx tomorrow morning xxx a humdrum river beach again? xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx summer moon, xxx this river beach crowd xxx gone tomorrow 
xxxxxx the man's whiteness xxx walking in the house's shadow... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx wind on the greenery, xxx the weary faces xxx of people 
xxxxxx to the grass-cutting xxx horse where he lies... xxx wind on the greenery 
xxxxxx the summer mountain xxx leans xxx on the cove 
xxxxxx touching the princess lily's xxx heart... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx selling straw sandals xxx in the shade, an old man... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx green rice field, xxx grabbing the chopsticks xxx he watches 
xxxxxx chopsticks in hand xxx his steady gaze xxx on the green rice field 
xxxxxx even poorly planted xxx rice plants xxx slowly, slowly...green! 
xxxxxx little snail xxx inch by inch, climb xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx to the great river xxx fleas go flitting... xxx rite of purification 
xxxxxx crow and nightingale xxx pass through it too... xxx purification hoop 
xxxxxx the perfect thing xxx for an old-time evening... xxx thatch of irises 
xxxxxx an insect singing? xxx look! look! xxx thatch of irises 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx even a beggar's house xxx has a summer banner 
xxxxxx weary cormorant, xxx no festival holiday xxx for you 
xxxxxx mopping sweat, xxx at his tomb i tell my story xxx then go 
xxxxxx even the little girl xxx poses like a saint... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx taking a tiny trip xxx to see and be seen... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx new summer robes, xxx listening to the pine breeze xxx they emerge 
xxxxxx amid scented cedars xxx a nightingale's song... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx after morning's hot bath xxx trying it on... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx one and all xxx in white summer kimonos... xxx riverbank 
xxxxxx temple toddler, xxx how long will you wear xxx your little red kimono? 
xxxxxx evening's old xxx summer kimono... xxx my world 
xxxxxx at my gate, xxx one straw mat xxx my summer room 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx if i die may the bamboo blinds xxx still be green 
xxxxxx my life, xxx if i die may the bamboo blinds xxx still be green 
xxxxxx a rain shower, xxx in her little mosquito net xxx touched by the breeze 
xxxxxx tomorrow night and the next xxx the same... xxx in my mosquito net, alone 
xxxxxx on the deer's back xxx the songbird takes xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx like the humans xxx a monkey too xxx curled up for siesta 
xxxxxx pine tree shade, xxx he beckons with his fan xxx a rain of golden coins 
xxxxxx after re-papering xxx the first thing i fan... xxx duckweed 
xxxxxx how pretty xxx over smudge pot smoke... xxx morning sun 
xxxxxx in smudge pot smoke xxx blooming red... xxx what flower is that? 
xxxxxx garden after garden xxx smudge pot smoke wafts xxx insects sing 
xxxxxx in the beach breeze xxx my travels forgotten... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx in pine tree shade xxx people take turns... xxx the cool air 
xxxxxx everyone kick off xxx your straw sandals! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx everyone keep on xxx your straw sandals! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx everyone keep on xxx your straw sandals! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx everyone kick off xxx your straw sandals! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx not knowing the bell xxx rings away life... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx knowing the bell xxx rings away life... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx with my feet counting xxx the mountains of shinano 
xxxxxx turning to face xxx my soot-blackened house... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx as night falls xxx even next to a sewer... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx rainy day, xxx alone and diligent xxx planting rice 
xxxxxx even asking directions xxx i hesitate... xxx rice planters 
xxxxxx ashamed xxx napping, hearing xxx the rice-planting song 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx higher and higher xxx the rice-planting songs 
xxxxxx you, too, nightingale xxx go with an umbrella-hat! xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx don't teach your tricks xxx to the fawn! xxx cawing crows 
xxxxxx in bush clover xxx staying well hidden... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx is the night this nice xxx back at the hut? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you feasting xxx on tofu dregs too? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx where were you poked xxx to make that sound... xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx stepping one foot xxx in an edo garden xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx sing soft! xxx a samurai lives next door xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx after dawn hits xxx the willow... xxx a cuckoo sings 
xxxxxx don't peck that xxx morning-glory! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx the priceless nightingale xxx warbles xxx even in summer 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx don't catch old age! xxx thatched house 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx don't catch old age! xxx house in the trees 
xxxxxx taking credit xxx for the good wind... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx a flower big xxx as an umbrella-hat... xxx fly there firefly! 
xxxxxx mosquito smudge smoke, xxx soon the fireflies xxx leave too 
xxxxxx from the tea water's xxx water pipe also comes... xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx sold with a clump xxx of grass... xxx firefly cage 
xxxxxx come, firefly! xxx firefly, come! xxx drinking alone 
xxxxxx left out all night xxx the tofu gleams... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx the whine of mosquitoes xxx pretty 
xxxxxx midday's mosquitoes xxx hidden behind xxx the buddha of stone 
xxxxxx hides midday's mosquitoes xxx in his back xxx statue of buddha 
xxxxxx "it's a good year!" xxx they buzz... xxx flies at the gate 
xxxxxx into the river xxx fleas are tossed... xxx sunrise 
xxxxxx on a pleasure walk xxx up the mountain... xxx temple flea 
xxxxxx until the winged ants xxx come out xxx my fortunate hut 
xxxxxx until the winged ants xxx come out xxx a fortunate pillar 
xxxxxx if you're praying xxx pray to amida buddha! xxx summer cicadas 
xxxxxx at my house xxx late-summer bonito xxx and bright moon 
xxxxxx in day flowers xxx airing out his loincloth... xxx little boy 
xxxxxx carrying a poppy xxx he passes through xxx the crowd 
xxxxxx virtue beyond virtue xxx beauty beyond beauty... xxx just a poppy! 
xxxxxx made to measure it xxx with a fan... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx petals scattered xxx by the sweeper's butt... xxx peony 
xxxxxx midday nap, xxx the scent of lotuses xxx meanders 
xxxxxx suddenly xxx the dog stops barking... xxx lotus blossoms! 
xxxxxx blooming pinks xxx behind and in front xxx of holy jizo 
xxxxxx duckweed, xxx rescuing a fish scooped up xxx with a little sedge hat 
xxxxxx hurled at the head xxx of morning fuji... xxx rice plants 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx sparkling with fireflies xxx the rice planting boat 
xxxxxx blooming in a nook xxx of ripened barley... xxx camellias 
xxxxxx newborn bamboo, xxx straight up the morning sun xxx climbing 
xxxxxx the thicket's bamboo xxx like all young folk... xxx agitated 
xxxxxx bamboo shoot shadows xxx cross the river... xxx morning sun 
xxxxxx the tallest xxx of the bamboo shoots... xxx sickly 
xxxxxx in leafy shade xxx a melon for a pillow... xxx a kitten 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx the only cooling melon xxx is the moon 
xxxxxx the gateway shelters xxx fresh green leaves... xxx a rainy day 
xxxxxx wisteria dangles xxx to its heart's content... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx making the lawn xxx a sit-down teahouse... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx making the lawn xxx a vacation spot... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx the preacher's xxx hand gestures... xxx the summer trees 
xxxxxx the big temple xxx looks empty... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx no lazing at the gate xxx they husk chestnuts... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx persimmon blossoms xxx falling... xxx only now noticed 
xxxxxx deutzia blossom hedge, xxx famous straw sandals xxx for sale 
xxxxxx circled by a hedge xxx of wild roses... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx handled and squeezed xxx edo's mushrooms xxx turn red 
xxxxxx added to xxx holy jizo's jewel... xxx a plum 
xxxxxx moon at the gate, xxx as the heat dwindles xxx so do people 
xxxxxx by the next room's lamplight xxx i sleep... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx by the next room's lamplight xxx eating my rice... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx night in the hut xxx feeling like carousing... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx vain mankind xxx feeling like carousing... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx at my hut xxx cold nights, cold days... xxx ah well 
xxxxxx looking at the mountain xxx looking at the sea... xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx at the inn xxx the autumn evening xxx is forgotten 
xxxxxx crabs jamming themselves xxx in the cattails... xxx autumn night 
xxxxxx every little island xxx fist after fist... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the night is long xxx my bottle, empty xxx my house, set apart 
xxxxxx evening cicada, xxx a last nearby song xxx to autumn 
xxxxxx frost has formed xxx on the futon... xxx milky way above 
xxxxxx charming, xxx in rural bamboo too xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx where the moon is rising xxx the home village's xxx cove 
xxxxxx on the river back home too xxx no doubt... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx tonight's moon, xxx no mountain not like xxx the ones back home 
xxxxxx tonight's moon, xxx how many mountains resemble xxx the ones back home? 
xxxxxx tonight's moon, xxx mountains just like xxx the ones back home 
xxxxxx tonight's moon, xxx mountains just like xxx the ones back home 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx side by side with the boat xxx a heike crab 
xxxxxx counting mountains xxx like the ones back home... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx elsewhere, no doubt xxx someone's viewing this island xxx this moon 
xxxxxx prayer beads dangling xxx a harvest moon prayer... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx it's become a top-notch night xxx of harvest moon! xxx rain-drenched grass 
xxxxxx it's become a top-notch night xxx of harvest moon! xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx harvest moon night xxx on the mountain, like any other... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx hiding with their coats xxx lust and piss 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx sitting cross-legged xxx like buddha 
xxxxxx sumiyoshi's lamps xxx die out again... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx singing in the duckweed xxx how many insects? 
xxxxxx a bird takes flight, xxx a shout in the duckweed xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx a barracks amid waves xxx of rushes gone to seed... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx when it comes inside xxx it dances full fury... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx a warm rain falls... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx warm rain falling xxx splish-splash... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx autumn gale, xxx but the new leaves xxx hang tough 
xxxxxx rainbow over the mountain xxx yet on the lake xxx an autumn gale 
xxxxxx sleeping mat, xxx the autumn gale blowing xxx the soles of my feet 
xxxxxx just the other day xxx we said goodbye... xxx dewy grave 
xxxxxx in the silver dew xxx one sleeve cold... xxx morning sun 
xxxxxx in the dewy field xxx one sleeve cold... xxx morning sun 
xxxxxx if someone asks xxx answer: it's a dewdrop xxx ok? 
xxxxxx unaware of life xxx passing like dewdrops... xxx they frolic 
xxxxxx even among silver xxx dewdrops... xxx some big, some little 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx in plume grass ensconced xxx a fifty year-old's face 
xxxxxx the lightning flash xxx makes someone cry... xxx cooling at the gate 
xxxxxx in morning mist xxx a frenzy of drops xxx from the tree 
xxxxxx autumn mist, xxx the river beach's pinks xxx have bloomed in a flash 
xxxxxx autumn mist, xxx the river beach's pinks xxx barely visible 
xxxxxx the orphan child xxx summons his mother xxx clapping 
xxxxxx the youngest child xxx on the grave visit xxx brings the broom 
xxxxxx stoking it xxx to find my shoes... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx a gathering of stars, xxx children, grandchildren xxx great-great-grandchildren 
xxxxxx upstream a village xxx for just a little while... xxx fireworks 
xxxxxx silence, xxx the mountain's fireworks xxx fly into water 
xxxxxx in a flash the lake xxx is filled... xxx with fireworks! 
xxxxxx for a moment xxx the darkness is lighted... xxx fireworks 
xxxxxx at verandah's edge xxx two-penny fireworks xxx in the night 
xxxxxx defeated sumo wrestler, xxx his father xxx must be watching 
xxxxxx protecting the camphor tree xxx too... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx like people xxx an upright scarecrow xxx can't be found 
xxxxxx my old age, xxx even facing a scarecrow xxx ashamed 
xxxxxx when i ask the way xxx to obasute... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx an abundance xxx of cooking smoke... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx cloth-pounding near xxx cloth-pounding far... xxx a rainy night 
xxxxxx into the grass xxx at the shrine, pouring... xxx new sake 
xxxxxx pleasure boat, xxx on the mountain a deer xxx calls his wife 
xxxxxx making a duet xxx with my flute... xxx cry of a deer 
xxxxxx solitude, xxx that song the shrike xxx is singing! 
xxxxxx a shrike sings, xxx rain puddles dry xxx on the back road 
xxxxxx geese landing, xxx the farmer's field too xxx a famous resort 
xxxxxx celestial geese, xxx none of them come down xxx to my pine 
xxxxxx geese at my gate, xxx another seductive rain xxx falls today 
xxxxxx geese descend, xxx the ancient rushes xxx a famous resort 
xxxxxx geese honking, xxx this damned year, too xxx moon gazing interrupted 
xxxxxx the titmice split xxx to the left and right... xxx yashima island 
xxxxxx high tide, xxx atop the moon's head xxx insects singing 
xxxxxx the insect's song xxx on the paper door xxx lingers 
xxxxxx still singing xxx the insect drifts away... xxx floating branch 
xxxxxx the bagworm xxx sings a song dangling xxx from a branch 
xxxxxx the bagworm xxx sings a song... xxx "i love rice cake!" 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx my shadow's umbrella-hat xxx makes a halo! 
xxxxxx sunset, xxx the town is buzzing xxx with dragonflies 
xxxxxx the discarded xxx umbrella-hat is loaded... xxx with locusts 
xxxxxx rustle, rustle xxx leaping at my shins... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx a quick dip xxx in the water bowl... xxx locust 
xxxxxx song of the katydid, xxx even the field cow xxx a connoisseur 
xxxxxx laugh at my piss xxx and shudder... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx when i die xxx guard my grave xxx katydid! 
xxxxxx cheeks stuffed xxx with a red flower xxx the katydid sings 
xxxxxx don't get hoarse xxx katydid! tomorrow is xxx autumn too 
xxxxxx the old dog xxx looks as if he's listening... xxx earthworms sing 
xxxxxx in a little nook xxx basking in the sun... xxx hermit chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx in a secret place xxx basking in the sun... xxx hermit chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the smell of sake xxx around about dusk... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx cat's bell, xxx in the long night the chrysanthemum xxx has bloomed 
xxxxxx the emaciated chrysanthemum xxx totters xxx into bloom 
xxxxxx the emaciated grass xxx totters xxx into bloom 
xxxxxx for the big xxx chrysanthemum too xxx autumn ends quickly 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx softly floating... xxx in the teacup 
xxxxxx the shrine's bell xxx jingles, a morning-glory xxx blooms 
xxxxxx shaking her body xxx in the summer rain... xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx woven into xxx the deer fence... xxx bush clover blooms 
xxxxxx mountain field, xxx blooming buckwheat's whiteness xxx makes me shiver 
xxxxxx it's cold! xxx a cicada in the eaves xxx with hot peppers 
xxxxxx plumes of plume grass, xxx the thin hearts xxx swishing 
xxxxxx evening's fall colors, xxx the rainbow in the valley xxx fades away 
xxxxxx to a place xxx the cool air missed... xxx a leaf falls 
xxxxxx the roasted rice cake xxx wrapped for luck... xxx paulownia leaf 
xxxxxx splendidly blooming xxx en masse, midday's xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx a splendid mountain home xxx and roses xxx of sharon 
xxxxxx the early sun xxx reaches the valley... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx butterflies never xxx tire of them... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx roses of sharon, xxx the hedge too good xxx for the house 
xxxxxx such roses of sharon! xxx yet the village xxx looks empty 
xxxxxx roses of sharon, xxx too good for the house xxx they bloom 
xxxxxx its shadow moves xxx across the tatami mat... xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx after cutting xxx the loofah vine... xxx strangers 
xxxxxx horse chestnut, xxx how many days till you roll xxx down the mountain? 
xxxxxx having a tumble xxx with the acorn... xxx kitten 
xxxxxx rain is over, xxx on the post a splendid xxx mushroom 
xxxxxx though i'm loving xxx these travels of mine... xxx it's cold! 
xxxxxx leaving it to melt xxx on the wall by the gate... xxx round ice 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx round as the moon xxx the tossed-out ice 
xxxxxx clamoring geese, xxx over there is the year xxx ending too? 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow, xxx the year ends xxx or doesn't end 
xxxxxx first winter rain, xxx going out to buy xxx dinner 
xxxxxx kyoto, xxx falling straight down xxx the first winter rain 
xxxxxx the mountain pigeon xxx grumbles... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the winter rain xxx dumps and dumps... xxx buddha in the field 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx on bean-parching day xxx the first winter rain 
xxxxxx the door latch xxx rusting scarlet... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the blooming cockscomb xxx dies standing up... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx the lame chicken xxx limps away 
xxxxxx the mountain hermit's xxx fire is rising... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx behind the wall xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx and the great temple hall xxx is ceiling-less 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx he can't find his roost xxx the evening crow 
xxxxxx stone still xxx he lets the snow fall xxx colt in the pasture 
xxxxxx falling snow, xxx yesterday it wasn't there xxx "house for rent" sign 
xxxxxx looking delicious xxx the snow falling softly xxx softly 
xxxxxx keeping the beat xxx of the prayer to buddha... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx stuck in his winnow xxx chopsticks and a charm... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx stuck in his winnow xxx chopsticks and a charm... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx a mirage running xxx and hiding... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx another year in good health xxx my journey's lice 
xxxxxx midwinter bathing, xxx his head, the moon xxx in the water 
xxxxxx sweeping the soot xxx washing the pine... xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx remote field, xxx even in a thicket xxx twelfth month singers! 
xxxxxx the beautiful courtesan xxx pets the child... xxx twelfth month singer 
xxxxxx is the next batch of rice cakes xxx for the crow? xxx saiho temple 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx even the god of wealth xxx watches eagerly 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx the altar's god of wealth xxx beams a smile 
xxxxxx from their son in edo xxx a gift for country parents... xxx new clothes 
xxxxxx ryogoku bridge, xxx even on a boat, people xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx about ten years old, xxx the calendar xxx on my hut's wall 
xxxxxx mother and children xxx are separated... xxx hunted birds 
xxxxxx the fleeing bird xxx turns back to her children xxx turns back... 
xxxxxx at basho's grave xxx beginning with a prayer... xxx first paper robe 
xxxxxx grumble, grumble xxx in the winter quilt.. xxx nagging 
xxxxxx hey mice xxx no pissing on my old xxx winter quilt! 
xxxxxx the boat arrives, xxx peeling off xxx the quilts 
xxxxxx snowshoes, xxx children show me how xxx to put them on 
xxxxxx a man pulls a snow sled xxx a dog atop xxx the cargo 
xxxxxx the big dog xxx wriggles in butt-first... xxx snow shed 
xxxxxx weak with age, xxx can't even break kindling xxx with my knee 
xxxxxx a war lord too xxx draws near our fire... xxx oi river 
xxxxxx giving a traveler xxx my place by the fire... xxx dawn 
xxxxxx straw-wrapped natto xxx smolders... xxx little wood fire 
xxxxxx my life alone, xxx all the way to ryogoku bridge xxx for medicine 
xxxxxx my life alone, xxx just to take medicine xxx a trip to kyoto 
xxxxxx after pufferfish soup xxx soon fans xxx are flitting 
xxxxxx making a face xxx he turns down the pufferfish soup... xxx teaching the children 
xxxxxx making a face xxx he turns down the boar stew... xxx teaching the children 
xxxxxx if i just whisper xxx the flock of plovers xxx bursts into flight 
xxxxxx cold, xxx the withered grasses xxx with prickles 
xxxxxx my gate, xxx just four or five radishes xxx in store 
xxxxxx still i see them xxx how they were... xxx bare winter trees 
xxxxxx an oak leaf this morning xxx fallen xxx in the tofu tub 
xxxxxx borrowing the umbrella-hat xxx daffodil... xxx sleeping sparrow 
xxxxxx daffodils wreathing xxx into the fence... xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx lucky! lucky! xxx a pale blue sky 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx the eel catcher writes pictures xxx on the water 
xxxxxx migrating servants, xxx even frogs and geese xxx cry when they part! 
xxxxxx dancing butterflies, xxx my journey forgotten xxx for a while 
xxxxxx solitude, xxx whichever way i turn... xxx violets! 
xxxxxx colorful birds xxx set free in the trees... xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx moss blossoms bloom xxx in a little crack... xxx stone jizo 
xxxxxx every tree xxx with its calling card... xxx spring buds 
xxxxxx even kisa lagoon xxx isn't hateful today... xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx the cure for xxx this raucous world... xxx late cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx after getting drunk xxx even our talk... xxx double cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx the morning sun rising xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx from an island's shadow xxx a rice barge 
xxxxxx for three pennies xxx nothing but mist... xxx telescope 
xxxxxx another two miles xxx for tomorrow's walk... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx mountain cuckoo, xxx early afternoon xxx on a mountain road 
xxxxxx up to now xxx people tramped there... xxx field of flowers 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx deep under snow xxx a bell 
xxxxxx messing up xxx the smooth-raked salt... xxx plovers 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx they look like dear friends xxx the two graves 
xxxxxx pheasant crying, xxx it's a plum blossom-filled xxx beggar's world now! 
xxxxxx resting his hands xxx on the green plum, asleep... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx the coastal wall, xxx camellias xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx my blossom comrades xxx when next we meet... xxx how many springs from now? 
xxxxxx i will return xxx to sweep the blossoms xxx under this tree 
xxxxxx descending the mountain xxx a cherry blossom-viewing mood xxx sets in 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx where's your snow now xxx shinano mountains? 
xxxxxx even the tree by the gate xxx safe and sound... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx is this rain falling xxx only on me? 
xxxxxx o mountain cuckoo xxx don't try being xxx like me! 
xxxxxx lotus blossoms, xxx just the place for discarded xxx lice 
xxxxxx thorny wild roses xxx "step over us here!" xxx as they bloom 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx riding on the waves xxx insects singing 
xxxxxx windy rain, xxx shaded by the house xxx insects singing 
xxxxxx from meeting rooms xxx of pine and bamboo... xxx year's first dawn 
xxxxxx spring ends in the town, xxx umbrella-hat, bamboo blind xxx vendors 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the pine on the ridge xxx whispers it 
xxxxxx when will we meet again? xxx i'm off to the phosphorescent fires xxx in the far mist 
xxxxxx white clouds of mist xxx blow away... xxx the village's mountain 
xxxxxx turning into white waves xxx at night? xxx the far mist 
xxxxxx the plowman stacks xxx volcanic rocks... xxx evening 
xxxxxx sea foam, xxx in the fleeting wave xxx a heike crab 
xxxxxx cutting off my hair xxx like a blossom-viewing party! xxx wicker umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx having a father and a mother xxx he stays home... xxx blossom day 
xxxxxx have celestial maidens xxx descended to earth? xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx creeping through white xxx cherry blossom clouds... xxx the mountain 
xxxxxx high noon, xxx the reed thrush sings xxx to a silent river 
xxxxxx in the summer night xxx i'm covered with a bath towel... xxx the inn 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx in just one dream xxx seventy miles! 
xxxxxx coolness! xxx everything in sight xxx at kiyomigata 
xxxxxx stillness, xxx in the depths of the lake xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx from deep in the cloud's xxx billows xxx thunder comes 
xxxxxx tucking her in xxx out i go... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx melting in one xxx amazing night... xxx mount fuji's snow 
xxxxxx in the ox cart's tracks xxx the barrier outpost's xxx pure water 
xxxxxx in kyoto xxx east, west, south, north... xxx summer kimonos 
xxxxxx mid-river xxx on three or four stools... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx escorted by xxx phosphorescent fires... xxx the cool air 
xxxxxx moonlight, xxx evening's cool reaches xxx akasaka 
xxxxxx skillful courtesans! xxx okazaki courtesans! xxx enjoying evening's cool 
xxxxxx the horse's fart xxx wakes me to see... xxx fireflies flitting 
xxxxxx let him pass xxx like a mosquito, a fly... xxx solitary priest 
xxxxxx hamamatsu beach, xxx helping out the cicadas xxx singing waves 
xxxxxx day flowers, xxx over the withered grass xxx they creep 
xxxxxx the peony falls xxx spilling out yesterday's xxx rain 
xxxxxx the plum tree xxx with heart at peace... xxx leafing green 
xxxxxx toh temple, xxx just its pagoda shows xxx over the summer trees 
xxxxxx hey boatman xxx no pissing on the moon xxx in the waves! 
xxxxxx the boatman pisses xxx but misses xxx the real moon 
xxxxxx matsushima, xxx clapping three or four times xxx then again, the moon 
xxxxxx blowing from the east xxx west south north... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx parting the rain xxx the evening mist ascends... xxx mountain 
xxxxxx paying a visit xxx to the weaver star... xxx a sneaky romeo 
xxxxxx defeated sumo wrestler, xxx is his father xxx watching too? 
xxxxxx kamakura, xxx these days scarecrows xxx are the gatekeepers 
xxxxxx people depart xxx ten thousand lanterns dying... xxx cry of a deer 
xxxxxx among the crags xxx under the storm... xxx insects singing 
xxxxxx mountain's red leaves xxx the setting sun returns xxx to the sky 
xxxxxx the mountain's red leaves xxx return the sunbeam xxx to the sky 
xxxxxx from the barrier gate xxx it's blown back... xxx cold wind 
xxxxxx while i looked at the duckweed xxx the pond xxx froze 
xxxxxx night wind, xxx the shrine's icicles xxx reflect the lights 
xxxxxx the ice of the moat xxx cracking... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx like it's lying down xxx on the winter wind 
xxxxxx outside, snow xxx inside, soot-caked... xxx my home 
xxxxxx a long ride, xxx hailstones drumming xxx umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx the beggar stove's too xxx a sight for sore eyes 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx one hates buckwheat noodles xxx one loves 'em 
xxxxxx an old man's ways, xxx my backside warmed xxx by the wood fire 
xxxxxx a wood fire, xxx her shadow in the window xxx pulling thread 
xxxxxx warming up xxx straw-wrapped fried rice... xxx my wood fire 
xxxxxx a windbreak xxx in the winter withering... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx even mid-journey a bowl xxx of zoni 
xxxxxx pretty girls multiply xxx day by day... xxx spring days! 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx the morning sun xxx crosses the threshold 
xxxxxx the village child xxx makes a river branch... xxx melting snow 
xxxxxx such is life, xxx the burning field's bugs xxx a feast for birds 
xxxxxx the plowman xxx shows me a shortcut... xxx evening 
xxxxxx even birds xxx make their nests... xxx beggars under the bridge 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx the kite and the lark xxx come down 
xxxxxx birds in the clouds xxx people in the sea... xxx a holiday 
xxxxxx at the rock's base xxx the frog's siesta... xxx high noon 
xxxxxx lying down to sleep xxx plucking the new grass... xxx sunbather 
xxxxxx camellia blossoms xxx come falling in... xxx bamboo grove 
xxxxxx my sleepy mind xxx counting cherry blossoms... xxx a rainy night 
xxxxxx windy rain, xxx pouring over the blossoms xxx a temple bell 
xxxxxx when the snake comes out xxx there's a brave soldier... xxx blossom viewers 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx with one cracked pot xxx my life alone 
xxxxxx summer moon, xxx in the vacant lot a ruckus xxx of voices 
xxxxxx mountain wind, xxx house after house xxx with summer banners 
xxxxxx a new summer robe, xxx for a little while xxx no lice 
xxxxxx through green bamboo blinds xxx a pretty woman xxx in white 
xxxxxx night work, xxx outside the mosquito net xxx she thinks of her child 
xxxxxx his child massages xxx his shoulders... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx burning mosquitoes, xxx in the paper lamp xxx my dear one's face 
xxxxxx only one xxx fans my ear... xxx mosquito 
xxxxxx close to my ear xxx a single breeze xxx from a mosquito 
xxxxxx proud branches xxx are trimmed... xxx fresh leaves of the hedge 
xxxxxx great japan, xxx under thick summer leaves xxx jesus-buddha 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum month, xxx for every mountain village xxx days of sake 
xxxxxx out of sake xxx such is my life... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx his grinding teeth xxx wake me... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx a traveling man busy xxx stitching 
xxxxxx not only waiting xxx for the harvest moon to rise... xxx streetwalker 
xxxxxx field of flowers, xxx whose umbrella-hat xxx marked you? 
xxxxxx hands clapping xxx mother teaches her child xxx the dance 
xxxxxx in the lake xxx alongside the duck... xxx the sneaky romeo star 
xxxxxx draining the rice field, xxx a fish also xxx heads home 
xxxxxx on the saddle xxx three, four, six... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx in the saddle xxx a little boy rides... xxx radish picking 
xxxxxx katydid, xxx for a little while xxx on my futon 
xxxxxx distant sight, xxx in withered fields xxx a little house's lamp 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx even for a buddhist temple xxx ise shrine's calendar 
xxxxxx great japan, xxx a foreigner also attends xxx the year's end service! 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx cooking a chicken xxx praising buddha 
xxxxxx squeezing in next xxx to my lover... xxx quilt-covered brazier 
xxxxxx an all-day job, xxx digging one small chunk xxx of firewood 
xxxxxx from crappy ground xxx to the plum tree xxx the wren 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx amid the storm xxx a sacred lantern 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx even the cherry tree xxx a place for straw 
xxxxxx i too celebrate xxx with zoni... xxx spring journey 
xxxxxx in the year's first dream xxx my home village... xxx tears 
xxxxxx lovers parting, xxx looking back at her house xxx until only mist 
xxxxxx opening the window xxx i see the butterfly off... xxx into the field 
xxxxxx mount taka, xxx while viewing blossoms xxx a temple pilgrimage 
xxxxxx narazaka, xxx even as night's blossoms bloom xxx the cry of a deer 
xxxxxx peach blossoms, xxx a belated "happy new year!" xxx for the inn's guests 
xxxxxx the tea smoke xxx and the willow xxx together trembling 
xxxxxx summer dawn, xxx riding an ox, asleep xxx the hay cutter 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx the half moon moves xxx across a puddle 
xxxxxx my walking stick xxx sends the trash floating... xxx cloudburst 
xxxxxx billowing clouds, xxx the mountains in the rain xxx all black 
xxxxxx peaks of clouds, xxx looking down, down... xxx mount aso's smoke 
xxxxxx the hated barnyard grass xxx rears its head... xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx in and out of raindrops xxx falling from the eaves they swarm... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx while looking xxx at poppies, poppies... xxx a storm 
xxxxxx irises, xxx where that rainbow xxx starts from 
xxxxxx in the dewy field xxx one sleeve cold... xxx morning sun 
xxxxxx bad luck! xxx into the bonfire for the dead xxx a tiger moth 
xxxxxx bonfire, xxx a scarecrow also ends up xxx in evening's smoke 
xxxxxx a gutter, xxx racing over ice xxx the cooking water 
xxxxxx winter moon, xxx more and more and more xxx tall peaks 
xxxxxx in first snow xxx last night's pine torch xxx remnant 
xxxxxx shady side of the house, xxx the blizzard blows xxx a pile 
xxxxxx lamplight flickers xxx in the smallpox shack... xxx a blizzard 
xxxxxx plowing the field, xxx the clatter xxx of hailstones 
xxxxxx morning frost melts xxx in the floodtide... xxx shinto shrine 
xxxxxx on the morning frost xxx the blacksmith's sparks xxx spurting 
xxxxxx in dawn frost xxx at the bathhouse door xxx knocking 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx damn roasted radishes! xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx boar hunt, xxx swiftly through the plume grass xxx evening shouts 
xxxxxx burning leaves, xxx sweet potatoes wrapped xxx in black paper 
xxxxxx new year's day, xxx that i'm still on this journey xxx unbelievable 
xxxxxx even beggars toast xxx with sesame sake... xxx first of spring 
xxxxxx off on a journey xxx i'm not alone... xxx first inn of the year 
xxxxxx "ah-choo!" xxx is someone gossiping about me? xxx spring journey 
xxxxxx one kettle xxx one willow tree... xxx this too is spring 
xxxxxx the servants xxx all are new... xxx little new year's 
xxxxxx my new year's xxx lucky direction walk... xxx to cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx houses here and there xxx fly kites, three...four... xxx two 
xxxxxx new year's kite, xxx out of green leaves xxx then back in 
xxxxxx sunny day rain xxx has splashed the kite... xxx it seems 
xxxxxx pounding the seven herbs xxx doesn't drown him out... xxx crow 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx after rain, a gang war xxx garden sparrows 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx the rained-on field's xxx morning smoke 
xxxxxx waking up, xxx the spring rain hasn't cleared xxx the day hasn't ended 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx one buddhist sermon xxx two haiku 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx pilgrims on their way xxx to rites for the dead 
xxxxxx in hazy night xxx stepping into water... xxx losing my way 
xxxxxx misty, misty moon xxx stepping into water xxx losing my way 
xxxxxx morning mist, xxx the castle's shutters xxx bang open 
xxxxxx at the gate xxx how many thousands of bushels xxx of far mist? 
xxxxxx drawing water xxx it's tepid... xxx nostalgia for olden times 
xxxxxx drawing water, xxx i noticed the tepidness xxx yearning for the olden days 
xxxxxx duckweed is first xxx to float... xxx rice-seedling bed 
xxxxxx when did they go? xxx all the swallows' nests xxx empty 
xxxxxx larks in the sky xxx people in the sea... xxx a holiday 
xxxxxx birds in the clouds xxx people in the sea... xxx a holiday 
xxxxxx frogs sing, roosters sing xxx the east xxx turns light 
xxxxxx a butterfly my companion xxx through nana field xxx we wander 
xxxxxx lying down xxx with a visiting butterfly... xxx outer hot spring 
xxxxxx amid the white xxx of the whitebait xxx duckweed's green 
xxxxxx heike crabs, xxx long ago they moon-gazed here xxx on boats 
xxxxxx resigning himself xxx to this oceanless province... xxx pond snail 
xxxxxx wisteria in bloom, xxx voices of pilgrims xxx voices of birds 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx when i open my paper door xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx for the plum blossom moon xxx i remove xxx a rain shutter 
xxxxxx i view three masters xxx of the original style... xxx plum blossom inn 
xxxxxx there comes a time xxx even in blossoming kyoto... xxx sick of it 
xxxxxx to my upturned face xxx as i pray, blossoms xxx drip down 
xxxxxx amid his grave's xxx blossoms i bow... xxx missing him 
xxxxxx distant mountain, xxx looking at the blossoms xxx then hurrying on my way 
xxxxxx divine providence, xxx throughout japan gods xxx guarding blossoms 
xxxxxx peach blossoms and willow xxx decorate the eaves... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx rain on the eaves, xxx the potted cherry tree xxx calm and still 
xxxxxx an off-the-cuff haiku xxx for a poor crop... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx turning 'round xxx just missing a pretty woman... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx the five thousand five hundredth xxx rented umbrella 
xxxxxx far distance, xxx above green rice fields xxx three mountains 
xxxxxx the cormorants stare xxx at them hard... xxx cormorant fishermen 
xxxxxx also changing xxx into a summer robe... xxx my journey's lice 
xxxxxx my new summer robe xxx splashed by hot xxx purification water 
xxxxxx for the potted bamboo xxx and me... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx daybreak, xxx the rooster-less village xxx has a cuckoo! 
xxxxxx the weary cormorant xxx sees off the cuckoo xxx in the sky 
xxxxxx temporary shrine, xxx acting like he owns it xxx a snail 
xxxxxx green plums, xxx the baddest of bad boys xxx bare-chested 
xxxxxx vast sky xxx vast earth xxx autumn passes too 
xxxxxx under dewy umbrella-hat xxx nodding off... xxx the dog barks! 
xxxxxx to gichu temple xxx we run... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx their traveling hats xxx looking small... xxx mist 
xxxxxx birds and people xxx creeping through... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx birds on the lake xxx all start honking... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx like the others xxx on tatami mats... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx in falling snow xxx in straw sandals xxx leaving the inn 
xxxxxx becoming a child xxx on new year's day... xxx i wish! 
xxxxxx the grave's soil xxx welcomes its falling... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx my new year's toast xxx with straw sandals on... xxx dawn 
xxxxxx from the nose xxx of the sudden riser... xxx mist 
xxxxxx watching rain fall xxx on the rice seedlings... xxx from the doorway 
xxxxxx crackling in the rainstorm, xxx field fires xxx mountain fires 
xxxxxx amid mustard flowers xxx till the ten o'clock bell... xxx morning tea 
xxxxxx plum blossom moon, xxx descending the ladder xxx i see it 
xxxxxx this morning i'm one xxx of the pure-minded priests... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx that temple bell xxx sounds like ueno's... xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx the blossom clouds xxx over mount miwa... xxx pitch black 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx over there an edge xxx of old japan 
xxxxxx cherry blossom clouds, xxx over there an edge xxx of old japan 
xxxxxx in cool air xxx slicing the falling rain... xxx lightning! 
xxxxxx wind on the greenery, xxx a weary cloud xxx hangs over 
xxxxxx wind on the greenery, xxx coming to see my house xxx the morning sun 
xxxxxx in the thick weeds xxx same as yesterday... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx while calling fireflies xxx crossing his profile... xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx in an alley xxx beating fleas off a mat... xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx when my heart's had its fill xxx it's dawn 
xxxxxx leaving now xxx is especially hard... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx though mount obasute xxx is hateful... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx evening mountain, xxx how long will the cold wind xxx blast? 
xxxxxx by the hearth xxx last night, his smile xxx was farewell 
xxxxxx up to yesterday xxx i saw you every day... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx in the blossoms xxx calling to me clumsily... xxx a little bird 
xxxxxx it seems to wash xxx the summer mountains... xxx sunrise 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx mostly rice planters xxx on the ferry 
xxxxxx his lock is worthless xxx he's told... xxx plowing the rice field 
xxxxxx if my father were here, xxx dawn colors xxx over green fields 
xxxxxx wind shakes the bamboo grass, xxx mother deer xxx returns 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx today i'm in good spirits xxx too 
xxxxxx shooing flies too xxx today, as he sleeps xxx for the last time 
xxxxxx night after night xxx of pestering... xxx fleas, mosquitoes 
xxxxxx at my feet xxx when did you get here? xxx snail 
xxxxxx splashing me xxx the survivor... xxx grassy dew 
xxxxxx new year's pine, xxx alone, listening to xxx the evening rain 
xxxxxx eye-catching xxx over the sunset mountain... xxx a kite 
xxxxxx the hairdresser's xxx white wooden clogs... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx a river of broth xxx is steaming... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx from the temple's xxx noon bath rising... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx snow in the little thicket xxx winking 
xxxxxx ice melting, xxx in the threshold xxx early evening's moon 
xxxxxx behind me i hear xxx the fox festival... xxx ueno hill 
xxxxxx no fox festival ruckus xxx on this hill... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx fox festival, xxx what village is this xxx in the mountain's nook? 
xxxxxx below the nightingale's xxx chin... xxx awaji island 
xxxxxx today they're flying xxx in the bathhouse town... xxx swallow swarm 
xxxxxx stopping to watch xxx the evening pines... xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx darkening dusk, xxx in one nettle tree xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx a meadow butterfly xxx bombarded by big raindrops xxx from the eaves 
xxxxxx flecked with sand xxx from the whirlwind... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx rain shower, xxx yesterday at this time xxx meadow butterflies 
xxxxxx someone's draped them xxx over the azaleas... xxx bracken 
xxxxxx one branch makes xxx kyoto's sky... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx like old times, xxx plum blossoms here and there xxx evening's wooden drum 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx the servant taro xxx is relieved 
xxxxxx holding up xxx the hazy moon... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx the main road xxx dry from drought... xxx midsummer 
xxxxxx pitter-patter rain, xxx a wild cormorant mother xxx cries on a branch 
xxxxxx from my bed xxx i peek outside... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx that one by itself xxx is my star... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx in the bamboo grove xxx too late at night! xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx the snipes too xxx tired of standing... xxx treeless hill 
xxxxxx gradually the geese xxx pass on... xxx rice field moon 
xxxxxx rain on the beach xxx stamping out xxx the wood fire 
xxxxxx removing my skullcap, xxx at everywhich gate xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx even at my penned-in xxx house... xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx "spring begins" xxx just saying it... xxx green everywhere 
xxxxxx stretching his neck xxx the turtle waits too... xxx the year's first day 
xxxxxx even in our faces xxx the year's first dawn... xxx the emperor's pine 
xxxxxx ending the servants' holiday xxx on purpose... xxx sliver moon 
xxxxxx under a clear sky xxx on a mountain... xxx year's first archery 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx i start the spring... xxx borrowed clothes 
xxxxxx begging actors xxx play one more song! xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx the gruel cauldron xxx all clean and ready... xxx herbs in the field 
xxxxxx a tree stump at the edge xxx of his holy face... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx in the bamboo basket xxx only a bit, of course... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx into my sleeve xxx fresh-picked new year's herbs... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the rooster also sings xxx to great japan... xxx on the rice cake mill 
xxxxxx scattering onto xxx my purple sleeves... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx kitasaga, xxx in evening rain xxx a pestle from olden times 
xxxxxx at my dinner tray xxx a sparrow chirps... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx elsewhere the shrines xxx are wonderful 
xxxxxx a crow's feather xxx on the toasted rice cake... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx though deep in the grasses xxx my home village 
xxxxxx seeing kyoto xxx i massage my shins... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx on horseback xxx making a silent bow... xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx having lost a child xxx the bird's face 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx missing a child xxx the parent's face 
xxxxxx melting snow, xxx at the foot of the mountain xxx a festival! 
xxxxxx saved from the fire xxx a nest in its beak... xxx the crow moves on 
xxxxxx when the nightingale xxx moves into the pine... xxx voice of the pine 
xxxxxx nightingale singing, xxx to the south a goose xxx clacking 
xxxxxx pine islands, xxx which one's good for sleeping xxx evening lark? 
xxxxxx evening lark, xxx which pine island's xxx your sleeping place? 
xxxxxx the dawn moon in raindrops xxx from the eaves... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx eating my rice xxx by lamplight... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx all eager to see xxx mount sarashina... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx the rice field geese xxx all head north... xxx a lucky spring day 
xxxxxx geese flying north, xxx the stage barn's lamplight xxx in mist 
xxxxxx departing geese xxx what are you xxx gabbing about? 
xxxxxx departing geese xxx over hokuroku road xxx departing 
xxxxxx on the day of departure, too xxx she leads... xxx the widow goose 
xxxxxx the gateway's lamp xxx in mist... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx rain-drenched grass xxx moon in the pine... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx a fleeting moonlit xxx wedding night... xxx frogs singing 
xxxxxx even in the well bucket xxx croaking all night... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx while croaking he jumps, xxx frog in the rainy xxx grass 
xxxxxx picking mulberry leaves, xxx the baby on her back xxx stretches a hand 
xxxxxx with thin arms xxx stripping mulberry leaves... xxx night rain 
xxxxxx how many people xxx waiting for evening? xxx wisteria in bloom 
xxxxxx it seems likely xxx someone's at home... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum trees bloom xxx nightingales sing... xxx all alone 
xxxxxx plum moon, xxx facing the blossoms xxx sewer water 
xxxxxx a branch of blooming plum xxx awaits the thief... xxx evening 
xxxxxx don't let the plum blossom guard xxx cut your tongues... xxx sparrows! 
xxxxxx waiting so long xxx for just one branch... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in katsushika xxx how many connoisseurs! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx at his house xxx though he's dirt-poor... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx laying my hands on them xxx suddenly, a face... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx guarding a house xxx with no live coals... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the owl xxx sees them first... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx among the pines xxx all alone xxx a plum tree blooms 
xxxxxx tis the season xxx for taking a wife... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx a harsh rain xxx falls at noon... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx off to one side xxx they're breath-taking... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx an old man's xxx flattering laughter... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx blossom clouds, xxx the loyal retainers xxx of old japan 
xxxxxx evening, xxx a bird of prey flies home xxx into blossoms 
xxxxxx by tomorrow xxx one mountain left... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx an ancient cherry tree xxx in bloom... xxx evening bell 
xxxxxx in a warm province xxx you see barley... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx a mountain where xxx no foot has stepped... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx these cherry blossoms xxx people eat... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx the mountain cherry blossoms xxx fell yesterday... xxx visitors from edo 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms, xxx people with homes xxx hurry home 
xxxxxx for the strange village xxx a prayer... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx green willows xxx are the first thing seen... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx from here on xxx it's great japan! xxx willow trees 
xxxxxx it's still xxx a sixth month sky... xxx summer's last day 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx at the gate a happy xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx a deer pokes his face xxx through the fence 
xxxxxx such cool air! xxx just ankle-deep xxx the little river 
xxxxxx from the treetop xxx gliding into midsummer... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx tucking me in xxx they cover my lap... xxx midsummer clouds 
xxxxxx the house has become xxx one heap of ivy... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx hidden by bamboo... xxx farmhouse 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx the second floor room xxx has wildflowers! 
xxxxxx even the branches xxx viewed from the second floor... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx on the river's bank xxx already it's a moonlit night... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx billowing clouds, xxx have the pine trees xxx shrunk a bit? 
xxxxxx emerging under xxx the peaks of clouds... xxx a little boat 
xxxxxx for the moment xxx straight above my pillow... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx a vast river island xxx gone without a trace... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx a so-called "summer moon" xxx one night xxx two nights... 
xxxxxx a big crop xxx for my neighbor's pear tree... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx the scrawny pine, too xxx looks extravagant... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx finally a clear sky xxx yet no moon... xxx summer mountain 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx with each step more xxx of the sea 
xxxxxx a rumble of thunder xxx in my empty stomach... xxx summer field 
xxxxxx the shallow well xxx loses its finery... xxx picking summer flowers 
xxxxxx in the outcastes' village xxx easily overlooked... xxx summer banners 
xxxxxx behind the night fishing xxx light xxx in a grove 
xxxxxx rain showers xxx to the north and east... xxx fishing the night river 
xxxxxx the great lord xxx does the brushing... xxx horse's sweat 
xxxxxx chewing the side xxx of her candy stick... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx my everyday umbrella-hat xxx doesn't match it... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx seeing the green mountain xxx for the first time... xxx ladies with parasols 
xxxxxx i see mokubo temple xxx i see ladies xxx with parasols 
xxxxxx gate after gate xxx the rain has cleared... xxx green bamboo blinds 
xxxxxx wind blows, xxx lots of rips, my so-called xxx mosquito net 
xxxxxx his starched summer xxx robe his blanket... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx wearing his starched xxx summer robe... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx entrusting it xxx to the green willow... xxx my paper fan 
xxxxxx in morning shadows xxx he passes through the barrier gate... xxx with paper fan 
xxxxxx sweeping off three drops xxx of rain in passing... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx moon on the sea, xxx he's under his fan xxx sleeping 
xxxxxx my old face rests xxx in morning-glories... xxx fanning my paper fan 
xxxxxx holding xxx such a pretty fan... xxx the widow 
xxxxxx downwind, an orchid xxx in moonlight... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx descending mount fuji xxx blow! blow! xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx to the west, to the east xxx smudge pots 
xxxxxx holding a lantern xxx tidying up... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx in the foot-tall bamboo xxx night after night... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx speak of the devil! xxx a snipe takes flight... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx one tree xxx one farmer's field... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx even if i touch her xxx this tree rejects me... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx planting a pine too xxx for after i die... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx if you get too close xxx the nettle tree will curse you! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx pine sapling, xxx before long, strangers enjoy xxx evening's cool 
xxxxxx going too far xxx into the thick of thorns... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx keeping her appointment xxx to enjoy evening's cool air... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx brazen with people xxx who come and go... xxx fawn 
xxxxxx lingering xxx under the paper umbrella... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx from atop the wheat xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx on a low branch xxx a child's imitation... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx so is haiku hell xxx over that-a-way... xxx mountain cuckoo? 
xxxxxx from the fir tree too xxx two are singing... xxx mountain cuckoos 
xxxxxx reed thrush, xxx the cow doesn't answer xxx his question 
xxxxxx lit by the mosquito-murdering xxx taper... xxx my white hair 
xxxxxx a mosquito xxx all day it whines... xxx by my pillow 
xxxxxx left out all night xxx the tofu gleams... xxx mosquitoes whisper 
xxxxxx swatting a fly xxx looking at xxx a mountain 
xxxxxx the grasses' fleas xxx pitter-patter move... xxx lamplight's shade 
xxxxxx while the floating island xxx moves along... xxx cicada chorus 
xxxxxx the moonflowers xxx strike it rich! xxx the stars 
xxxxxx moonflowers, xxx one by one the wind xxx rustles them 
xxxxxx heat shimmers xxx on top of heat shimmers... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx the tall pines xxx end up sunburned xxx o poppies! 
xxxxxx from the day they bloomed xxx drenched by rain... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx among the footprints xxx of the warriors... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx the gatekeeper's xxx side-field... xxx let the poppies bloom! 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx not a soul in sight... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx in the white lotuses xxx two or three strands xxx of willow 
xxxxxx even in the mouth xxx of the gutter pipe... xxx lotuses 
xxxxxx the scent of lotuses xxx in the back xxx house on a hill 
xxxxxx against the mountain pine xxx they're blown... xxx lilies 
xxxxxx staring at me xxx on and on... xxx toad in the lilies 
xxxxxx duckweed blooms, xxx and below that xxx a street 
xxxxxx duckweed, xxx a little black butterfly xxx flitting 
xxxxxx a mount fuji viewing spot xxx for barley harvesters... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx leftovers in the mountain xxx spring's ditch... xxx barley harvest 
xxxxxx the barley harvesters xxx show no mercy... xxx young bamboo 
xxxxxx just when the young bamboo xxx starts to straighten... xxx lightning 
xxxxxx also running late, xxx my garden's xxx eggplants 
xxxxxx growing where xxx the seedling seller passed... xxx first eggplant 
xxxxxx one more day xxx of leafy shade for you... xxx eggplant 
xxxxxx on the gate's post xxx where the pony is tied... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx for the second day xxx the same big snake... xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx every day xxx four or five fall... xxx sleeping tree's blossoms 
xxxxxx the green plum xxx also accepts the feeling xxx of the ant 
xxxxxx groping for plums, xxx the frog on the branch xxx is magnanimous 
xxxxxx autumn cold, xxx wherever i go people xxx have homes 
xxxxxx paying no heed xxx to morning's cold... xxx shoots of rice 
xxxxxx he checks the bamboo xxx with concern... xxx morning cold 
xxxxxx beating the empty xxx straw bag,nothing! xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx while leaning on it xxx it's turned chilly... xxx the post 
xxxxxx alone he cries xxx the motherless bird... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx even the pine tree xxx i planted grows old! xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx "it's a foolishly long xxx night!" i say xxx in the long night 
xxxxxx the pine wind xxx blows in my ear... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx milky way, xxx maybe the fools of kyoto xxx are crying 
xxxxxx a cloud zigzags xxx above where i lie... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx a clear view xxx in the soup kettle... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx some places up there xxx look deep... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx where will my star xxx stop for the night? xxx milky way 
xxxxxx the defeated wrestler, too xxx joins the crowd... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx no westward facing xxx pissing tonight... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx comes tomorrow... xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx on the white rock's xxx white heart... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx up in that sky... xxx for foreigners, too! 
xxxxxx there's water xxx beyond the stubble... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx the lamplight lights xxx my knees 
xxxxxx lamplight glimmers xxx on my knees... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx night begins now xxx for the nettle tree 
xxxxxx the pony leaves xxx his home village... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the wind chills xxx one sleeve... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the half-eaten melon's xxx young green leaf... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx its mouth open xxx waiting for mother... xxx baby bird in the autumn rain 
xxxxxx what's your home village like xxx rice field goose? xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx lamplight glimmers xxx on my knees... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx the lamplight lights xxx my knees 
xxxxxx on four or five xxx slender blades of grass xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx even the pine tree xxx looks rustic... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the autumn wind xxx blows as if it knows xxx i'm an orphan 
xxxxxx two leaves of radish xxx rejoice! xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx one by one xxx everyone has left... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx shining up xxx the evening moon... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx humidity, xxx from beneath a stone xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx humidity, xxx even one blade of grass xxx is autumn 
xxxxxx clinging to the lord's xxx umbrella-hat too... xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx a wrinkled face xxx he's my age... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx bon lanterns, xxx yesterday's tiles xxx today are weeds 
xxxxxx stopping to watch xxx three, two... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx in pine-tree shade xxx the one who doesn't dance xxx ivory white 
xxxxxx the sound of oars xxx lingers... xxx good stars tonight 
xxxxxx for the fisherman's xxx rising smoke too... xxx good stars tonight 
xxxxxx tanabata in great japan, xxx one out of three xxx are male 
xxxxxx the sun sets xxx on the tournament... xxx sumo champion 
xxxxxx sitting in front xxx his father's face... xxx defeated wrestler 
xxxxxx even the scarecrow xxx turns his back to it... xxx my home 
xxxxxx sound of river xxx sound of bird clapper... xxx daybreak is near 
xxxxxx favoring xxx mount akahage... xxx distant cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx in one ear a bell xxx on the ridge, someone pounding cloth xxx in the evening 
xxxxxx pounding cloth xxx in the night... xxx rain on the nettle tree 
xxxxxx her mouth and hands xxx not like everyone's... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the flood was exactly xxx a year ago... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the lord of sarashina's xxx buckwheat fields... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx sarashina, xxx in a dark direction xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx this afternoon in suma xxx autumn begins... xxx distant cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx dangling from xxx the young buck's antler xxx weeds 
xxxxxx the little crow xxx is snubbed... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx another year xxx they're back for the massacre... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx flying south xxx for the slaughter? xxx celestial geese 
xxxxxx a new face xxx in the flock... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx when you return xxx don't forget my house! xxx departing swallows 
xxxxxx "the world of man xxx and me are good!" xxx locusts fly 
xxxxxx after a wasted night xxx the rain falls... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx today again xxx death draws nearer... xxx the wildflowers 
xxxxxx their many colors xxx fade so soon... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx blooming thick... xxx someone else's house 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx utterly drenched... xxx a passing rain 
xxxxxx pine's ivy, xxx after leaves turn red xxx cut down 
xxxxxx sir horse's fart xxx wafting over... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx the divine wind xxx blows a blessing... xxx spears of rice 
xxxxxx a big pig xxx sticks out his face... xxx blooming rushes 
xxxxxx downstream, the gate xxx to knowledge... xxx evening's red leaves 
xxxxxx treading untrodden xxx earth to see... xxx evening's red leaves 
xxxxxx people have gone xxx lanterns have died... xxx one leaf remains 
xxxxxx it's all yours xxx butterfly, take a rest xxx on the mushroom 
xxxxxx keeping his cool xxx under a twelfth month moon... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx even from falling rain xxx stabbing xxx cold 
xxxxxx palms xxx in the cooking smoke xxx winter cold 
xxxxxx driftwood floating xxx this way, that way... xxx ends the year 
xxxxxx over one wall xxx the sea wind blows... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx the winter moon xxx hanging over... xxx back window 
xxxxxx the winter moon xxx on my lap... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx cedars are tall xxx in my hometown... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx first winter rain, xxx even the warlord's horse xxx wears his crest 
xxxxxx right away xxx a second winter rainfall... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx cold northern rain, xxx the fire-starter's face xxx smells burnt 
xxxxxx on the neighbor's house xxx where smoke rises... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx led by a cow xxx to zenko temple 
xxxxxx windblown here they come, xxx the winter rain xxx the thin man 
xxxxxx mountain house, xxx it's off, it's on xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx rainy winter night, xxx the horse neighs too xxx toward his home village 
xxxxxx evening of winter rain, xxx a rice field crane xxx stands tall 
xxxxxx in night's winter rain xxx a face... xxx his parents' gate 
xxxxxx winter rain xxx pouring down on me... xxx kazusa mountains 
xxxxxx winter raincloud xxx every day snagged xxx in the nettle tree 
xxxxxx three meals a day xxx this trip, too much! xxx winter storm clouds 
xxxxxx "the wind xxx is cold! cold! cold!" xxx ceramic lamp 
xxxxxx settling into a night xxx of winter wind... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx smoke from a sawdust fire xxx house at the crossroads 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx looking in the gate xxx with a little lantern 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx on the wall's ledge xxx the horse's bucket 
xxxxxx hearing of first snow xxx a dreadful thing... xxx old man 
xxxxxx the first snow xxx softly, softly clings... xxx side lock of hair 
xxxxxx sound of the ocean xxx north of the fence... xxx night snow 
xxxxxx onto high noon's grasses xxx flitting down... xxx snowflakes 
xxxxxx the imperial guard's fire xxx blazes still more... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx strange, xxx the moon shining xxx while sleet falls 
xxxxxx my sake keg xxx open for business... xxx sleet pours down 
xxxxxx my tea-boiled rice xxx in the palm of my hand... xxx falling sleet 
xxxxxx sweeping sleet, xxx at the rafter's metal tip xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx night sleet, xxx even my bamboo plant xxx in a rotten mood 
xxxxxx steam from boiling soup xxx a fence... xxx falling sleet 
xxxxxx my full serving of vegetables xxx all greens... xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx waking up xxx with a sneeze... xxx frost on the grass 
xxxxxx warming my palms xxx in the cooking smoke... xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx the old man's skirt xxx hiked up his thighs... xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx on a secluded house xxx the warm sun... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx through one sleeve xxx the wind passes... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx a seven-child ruckus xxx in withered fields... xxx little house 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx splash-splish the rain... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx he hates taking xxx the shortcut... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx a bird of prey xxx and smoke... xxx over withered fields 
xxxxxx the anti-insect charm xxx flutters, flutters... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx my shadow looks xxx like the old man's! xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx even a rooster singing xxx great japan! xxx rice cake tub 
xxxxxx the rice cake pounding xxx is now behind me... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx also a year older xxx the crane flies down... xxx a field 
xxxxxx daybreak xxx at the hunting shack... xxx the dog's bell 
xxxxxx in the teeth xxx of mount fuji's wind... xxx winter skullcap 
xxxxxx around noon xxx i come back to fold it up... xxx futon 
xxxxxx three or five stars xxx by the time i fold it... xxx futon 
xxxxxx the death bell xxx tolls at the temple... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx my father saw xxx this same damn mountain... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx for pure water xxx go to edo's outskirts... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx on the nape xxx of my neck, setting sun xxx and hibachi 
xxxxxx after getting up xxx i hear a crow... xxx starting my charcoal fire 
xxxxxx a charcoal fire xxx happy and well... xxx the thicket next door 
xxxxxx the rooster flaps and crows xxx "it's time!" xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx snap and crackle xxx the camellia blooms xxx the coal fire smokes 
xxxxxx through the thicket xxx happy and well... xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx in careful bits xxx your life slips away too... xxx charcoal bag 
xxxxxx my charcoal goes quickly, xxx bag's bottom xxx lit by a sickle moon 
xxxxxx in just a twinkling xxx you've gotten low... xxx charcoal bag 
xxxxxx no sooner than i thought xxx it an obstacle... xxx charcoal bag 
xxxxxx rainy day, xxx tramping over firewood xxx to my evening's gazing 
xxxxxx happiness xxx just before dawn xxx is a wood fire 
xxxxxx vegetables hung to dry xxx at two houses... xxx thatch dripping rain 
xxxxxx thatched house, xxx on the doll's face dripping xxx rain 
xxxxxx vegetables hung to dry xxx in front... xxx two little houses 
xxxxxx smack in front xxx of buddha, vegetables xxx hung to dry 
xxxxxx looking shameful xxx to the pufferfish... xxx people's faces 
xxxxxx for the headman xxx in the house facing mine... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx kyoto, kyoto xxx in the heart of kyoto! xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx how much are you bringing xxx to the headman? xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx red leaves xxx flitting down... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx pufferfish soup, xxx putting on airs xxx like a great courtier 
xxxxxx a pufferfish soup-lover xxx in the facing window... xxx rented house 
xxxxxx pufferfish soup, xxx not wanting to eat xxx the head 
xxxxxx in kyoto xxx even for apprentices! xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx for a great courtier xxx of the imperial palace... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx pufferfish soup, xxx putting on airs xxx like a great courtier 
xxxxxx the mountain's red leaves xxx blowing down... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx from one side xxx wind from the hills... xxx plovers singing 
xxxxxx from atop a kettle xxx in evening's glow... xxx a plover's song 
xxxxxx trust in the buddha xxx waterfowl! xxx a rainy night 
xxxxxx to wherever xxx the wind may blow it... xxx a pufferfish 
xxxxxx hanging by a cuff xxx on withered bush clover... xxx sunset 
xxxxxx winter's withered bush clover xxx peaceful too... xxx house for sale 
xxxxxx those red seeds xxx are poisonous! xxx withered plume grass 
xxxxxx withered plume grass, xxx a solitary house xxx for sale 
xxxxxx that one is xxx tomorrow night's dinner... xxx radish 
xxxxxx even if winter rain falls xxx i'll save this one xxx radish 
xxxxxx yanking radishes xxx one by one... xxx watching the clouds 
xxxxxx in the rain shower xxx standing straight... xxx the radish puller 
xxxxxx winter arrives xxx at my hut... xxx a scrawny radish 
xxxxxx surprising xxx the gardener... xxx out-of-season blooms 
xxxxxx by a mountain stream xxx catching a chill... xxx out-of-season blooms 
xxxxxx also facing xxx the sea... xxx winter camellias 
xxxxxx without seeing sunlight xxx the winter camellia xxx blooms 
xxxxxx a clear sky xxx at high noon... xxx walking out alone 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx tall as a sleeping man... xxx the clouds 
xxxxxx first month, xxx the plum trees blooming xxx elsewhere 
xxxxxx once again xxx i've managed not to die... xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx my spring, xxx a bit of bamboo xxx and a willow sprig 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx forty three years xxx fed by strangers 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx in yoshino the faces xxx of fools 
xxxxxx without a shred xxx of pine decoration... xxx the year's first dawn 
xxxxxx i greet the year's first dawn xxx in the top bunk... xxx inn 
xxxxxx in the top bunk xxx i'm first to greet it... xxx year's first dawn 
xxxxxx choosing a branch xxx for her "pregnancy stick"... xxx mount oshio 
xxxxxx the homecoming servant xxx stands in front xxx visiting graves 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx shinto dances on the mountain xxx ended yesterday 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx the graveyard's pine xxx safe and sound 
xxxxxx servants' holiday! xxx sing "great japan" xxx rain on the wheat field 
xxxxxx even a nettle tree xxx is uprooted... xxx first day of rat 
xxxxxx yanking up trees xxx he saves one for moon gazing... xxx little pine 
xxxxxx down comes my new year's pine, xxx let the god of wealth xxx be shocked! 
xxxxxx a sumiyoshi shrine charm xxx attached too... xxx gate's pine decoration 
xxxxxx keeping the falling xxx snow company... xxx new year's pine 
xxxxxx the begging actors xxx pay a visit... xxx parents and children 
xxxxxx the pounding xxx of the seven herbs resumes... xxx noontime 
xxxxxx are you coming down xxx crane, to see? xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the kettle's lid xxx rattle, rattle... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx in every thicket xxx where people live... xxx pounding new year's herbs 
xxxxxx to my home village xxx the water flows... xxx springtime 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx last year which tree root xxx was my pillow? 
xxxxxx the spring day's xxx remnants... xxx only in the water 
xxxxxx spring evening, xxx he comes out to pet xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx watching the river xxx through a window of trees... xxx spring rain falls 
xxxxxx "sake for sale" xxx a sign on a wall... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx because of spring rain xxx the dear nettle tree xxx is missed 
xxxxxx becoming inured xxx to spring's rain... xxx lamp-lit house in the trees 
xxxxxx getting used to xxx the spring rain, xxx the house in the woods is lighted. 
xxxxxx standing tall xxx in the spring rain... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx at the edge of the spray xxx my dear one's gate 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx a sparrow begs xxx by my dinner tray 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx a delightful fire xxx under the kettle 
xxxxxx steam on the bay xxx past midday... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx walking along xxx a baking pan on his head... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx clang once more xxx mountain temple bell! xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx my pine tree too xxx is grateful... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the little tub's xxx braided bamboo is green... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx not a blade of grass xxx untouched by the spring breeze... xxx country jelly 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx golden flowers in bloom xxx on mount mutsu 
xxxxxx the pine saplings xxx over shoulder-high... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx walking in mist xxx in a little sedge hat xxx with both parents 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx the holy man's xxx bare feet 
xxxxxx splashed with slush xxx close to the ground... xxx a monk's face 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even here, crowd-sick xxx spring mountain 
xxxxxx the old priest xxx in his fancy clothes... xxx spring mountain 
xxxxxx pinching head lice xxx in a doorway... xxx spring fields 
xxxxxx kokemomo berries too xxx at the festival... xxx red flowers 
xxxxxx in katsushika xxx like olden times, unchanged... xxx doll festival 
xxxxxx the mist covers up xxx the women first... xxx shell gathering 
xxxxxx solitude, xxx even on a low tide day xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx low tide xxx in a soft, soft rain... xxx darkness coming 
xxxxxx low tide, xxx to my woman's house xxx a long way to go 
xxxxxx low tide, xxx the mist wrecks my view xxx of the women 
xxxxxx low tide xxx without pine trees... xxx lonelier still 
xxxxxx at sumiyoshi xxx all through the low tide... xxx moon in the pine 
xxxxxx waited so long xxx for the low tide... xxx a driving rain 
xxxxxx a house xxx with a rooster crowing... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx rain falling, xxx for the low tide gatherers at last xxx the sunset bell 
xxxxxx from the temple xxx easy access... xxx shell gathering 
xxxxxx where i've seen xxx birds nesting... xxx they burn the mountain 
xxxxxx toward the open mouth xxx of the nesting bird... xxx the sunset bell tolls 
xxxxxx pray good health xxx for the nesting bird! xxx amida's priest 
xxxxxx the bird nest xxx in plain sight for all to see... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx bird's nest, xxx tomorrow the pine by the gate xxx will be cut down 
xxxxxx the baby sparrow xxx cheep! cheep! cheep! xxx he cries 
xxxxxx sparrow babies xxx in plum blossoms xxx praise buddha! 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx are you also returning? xxx my window 
xxxxxx hey nightingale xxx turn this way! xxx red beans and rice 
xxxxxx to every window xxx an off-key nightingale xxx comes too 
xxxxxx in a sparse thicket xxx an off-key nightingale too... xxx first song 
xxxxxx on the mountain xxx rain falling xxx lark singing 
xxxxxx at sumiyoshi xxx lamps are burning xxx larks are singing 
xxxxxx a skylark sings, xxx a man facing xxx sunset 
xxxxxx singing skylark xxx where is this poor village's xxx border? 
xxxxxx even the field's xxx radishes are blooming... xxx the lark singing! 
xxxxxx the lark sings xxx as it flies along... xxx great japan! 
xxxxxx my home village xxx no longer in sight... xxx singing lark 
xxxxxx my parents' house xxx no longer in sight... xxx summer mountain 
xxxxxx evening rushes in, xxx someone on the tideland xxx a lark singing 
xxxxxx evening lark xxx don't let the field's smoke xxx annoy you 
xxxxxx mingling xxx with the thunder, xxx a pheasant's cry 
xxxxxx a pigeon cries, xxx even deep in the thousand islands xxx it's buddha's world 
xxxxxx celebrate the morning rain xxx then off you go! xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx the last in line xxx hits the rain... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx departing geese xxx where will you moon-gaze xxx tomorrow? 
xxxxxx the departing goose xxx stares the man xxx in the face 
xxxxxx are the rice field's geese xxx planning to fly north? xxx planning not to? 
xxxxxx pooping on the farmer's xxx umbrella-hat xxx the goose departs 
xxxxxx the bald mountain, too xxx memorize by sight! xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx just one xxx but he goes honking... xxx departing goose 
xxxxxx geese taking off xxx have a drink on me... xxx kyoto's water 
xxxxxx traveling geese, xxx those rice fields weren't flooded xxx yesterday 
xxxxxx don't go geese! xxx after twenty days xxx this is your home 
xxxxxx "my love xxx is at mount sarashina!" xxx the goose departs 
xxxxxx all eager to see xxx mount sarashina... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx a lovely night lit xxx with oil lamps... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx croaking frogs, xxx my first night xxx visiting this house 
xxxxxx the kettle's soot xxx in his mouth and eyes... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx spring's first frog, xxx another drop falls xxx from the twig 
xxxxxx on a hurry-scurry xxx butterfly day xxx guarding the money 
xxxxxx fresh-scooped mud xxx from the little ditch... xxx a little flitting butterfly 
xxxxxx from the weeds xxx that little butterfly xxx is born! 
xxxxxx nervously xxx through the raindrops... xxx spring butterfly 
xxxxxx riverbank, xxx the butterfly's bed xxx a kettle's bottom 
xxxxxx the mountain sunset xxx within my grasp... xxx spring butterfly 
xxxxxx a shortcut through xxx the temple with permission... xxx spring butterfly 
xxxxxx flitting butterfly xxx even stagnant water xxx a spring thing 
xxxxxx the year's first xxx butterfly xxx full of swagger 
xxxxxx a butterfly xxx this year's first, xxx straight, bold 
xxxxxx blowing along xxx blowing along... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx blown to the window xxx again xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx from a palanquin xxx at the lake, watching xxx spring butterflies 
xxxxxx rubbing sand from his eyes xxx in my hand... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx to the man walking xxx "look behind you!" xxx windblown butterfly 
xxxxxx getting used to xxx the screen weaver's hammer... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx a group of women xxx overtake me... xxx field of violets 
xxxxxx violets on the gate, xxx even at night xxx sweet nostalgia 
xxxxxx blooming violets, xxx some worthless grass xxx dug up too 
xxxxxx before me xxx who also lived here xxx with these violets? 
xxxxxx clobbered every day xxx by raindrops from the eaves... xxx camellias 
xxxxxx a tide wall xxx for the coast, camellias xxx blooming 
xxxxxx surveying also xxx bloody clams... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx "look! plum blossoms!" xxx the little boat xxx turns around 
xxxxxx if there's a house xxx standing alone, sure enough... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx precious little plum trees xxx in bloom... xxx the main road 
xxxxxx if only for a day xxx to have my own house! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx behind me xxx laughter at my rags... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx for whoever shows up xxx a cracked teacup 
xxxxxx in plum blossoms xxx kettle soot won't come off... xxx my wrinkled hands 
xxxxxx plum in bloom, xxx even wood chopping xxx a morning scene 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx last year's unemployed worker xxx from echigo 
xxxxxx plum trees bloom xxx in full glory... xxx my broken inkstone 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, moon xxx and the rump xxx of a cow 
xxxxxx viewing plum blossoms xxx viewing blue sky... xxx but i'm in the sticks 
xxxxxx also rambling xxx over the big field... xxx plum blossom moon 
xxxxxx one by one they come xxx off-key nightingales xxx to the plum blossom window 
xxxxxx has this place become xxx old lo-yang? xxx plum blossom moon 
xxxxxx after blooming xxx the plum tree a scratching post... xxx horse's head 
xxxxxx the damn cedars xxx ripping sleeves! xxx plum trees in bloom 
xxxxxx a plum blossom falls xxx to a low place... xxx scar from burning wormwood 
xxxxxx the lap-baby's xxx first pointing... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx not very devoted xxx to blooming... xxx plum tree at my gate 
xxxxxx quite a feat, xxx in utter silence xxx the plum tree blooms 
xxxxxx esoteric xxx even if we kept quiet xxx still the plum would have bloomed." 
xxxxxx my hut's xxx down-and-out plum tree xxx has bloomed! 
xxxxxx mister monkey too xxx wears a funny face... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx white as a monk's xxx whitest robe... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx are the sparrows too xxx having a private party? xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx soon after blooming xxx pelted by rain... xxx mountain cherry trees 
xxxxxx from where xxx did those blossoms float? xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx eating my pickle xxx rind and all... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx first flowers, xxx boiled mountain millet xxx sweet nostalgia 
xxxxxx are you falling xxx to wash dust off blossoms xxx rain? 
xxxxxx in falling rain xxx one man remains... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx the home village xxx i abandoned... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx made to wither xxx by the people of edo's eyes... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx blown to the big river xxx floating away... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx heavy rain, xxx in cherry blossom shade xxx i stayed too long 
xxxxxx blended in xxx with people of kyoto... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx after blooming xxx they're roped off... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx four, five, nine years xxx always the first to bloom... xxx cherry tree 
xxxxxx the holy man xxx leaves them behind... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the first cherry tree xxx long as my sleeve... xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx the first cherry blossoms xxx soon scatter and stick... xxx people's faces 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx tree after tree xxx of good karma 
xxxxxx an evening xxx of steady rainfall... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx again someone stands xxx blocking my view! xxx first cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx half-hidden xxx in the rain shower... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx evening, xxx in the area with no pond, too xxx cherry blossoms scatter 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx whichever side i sleep on xxx within hand's reach 
xxxxxx lucky the toad, too xxx swaggers out... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx green willow, xxx thinking of a night xxx of calling fireflies 
xxxxxx green willow, xxx soon we'll be calling xxx fireflies here 
xxxxxx shiruyoshi's bell xxx is clanging... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx all spattered xxx with bird poop... xxx the willow tree 
xxxxxx no one at home xxx to sleep with? xxx willow shade 
xxxxxx an evening spot xxx for calling fireflies... xxx planting a willow 
xxxxxx from where a fence xxx pens it in... xxx a willow 
xxxxxx three strands or so xxx hide in the pine... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx looking at willows xxx and toh temple... xxx olden times return 
xxxxxx little by little xxx the summer night turns dawn... xxx people's faces 
xxxxxx all day, all day xxx day after day... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx in the town how long xxx this flute ban? 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx postponed by amida xxx till yesterday 
xxxxxx cawing crow xxx today will the fifth month rains xxx peter out? 
xxxxxx two won't fit xxx in the little shrine... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx a pretty sleeping mat xxx also in view... xxx cloudburst 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a one-bamboo xxx little farm field 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx watching from a boat xxx kyoto's mountain 
xxxxxx billowing clouds xxx rise over the field... xxx eating rice balls 
xxxxxx on every man's face xxx a hungry look... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx plunging my hand xxx into the lake... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx patting my belly xxx full of worms... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx in soup kettle xxx and outhouse xxx the summer moon 
xxxxxx summer moon, xxx in one pet of the post xxx it's dawn 
xxxxxx how much longer xxx this damn drought? xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx my parents' house xxx no longer in sight... xxx summer mountain 
xxxxxx my home village xxx no longer in sight... xxx singing lark 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx just when i sight kyoto xxx rain! 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx a glowing xxx little pilgrim 
xxxxxx a man wiping xxx a post... xxx the summer mountain 
xxxxxx even in the rushes xxx if the moon is shining... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx no moonlight xxx but gushing pure water 
xxxxxx pure water gushes, xxx looking at tomorrow's mountain xxx lying down 
xxxxxx the moon shines xxx up to the pine... xxx pure water gushes 
xxxxxx gushing pure water, xxx mount asama's smoke xxx appears again 
xxxxxx the hated grasses xxx rear their heads... xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx hidden by trees xxx mother's side-field... xxx rice so green 
xxxxxx new summer robes, xxx the thicket's become xxx opulent 
xxxxxx new summer robes, xxx now i want xxx a pine tree! 
xxxxxx on takasago xxx even for the nettle tree... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx in a sparse thicket, in my window xxx the bright moon... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx even trying on my summer kimono xxx lonely... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx entering my ramshackle xxx hut you see... xxx a parasol 
xxxxxx the high priest xxx poops in the field... xxx parasol 
xxxxxx moonlight enters xxx only through the window... xxx paper mosquito net 
xxxxxx after trying out xxx the twice-fired sake... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx the field's too much xxx for one man alone... xxx rustic fan 
xxxxxx the pine tree dew xxx dripping, dripping... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx when the tree is watered xxx the bamboo makes do... xxx run-off 
xxxxxx morning-glories blooming xxx just for me... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx tomorrow xxx buddha will be shaved... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx cooling at the gate, xxx morning-glories have bloomed xxx elsewhere 
xxxxxx even cool air basking xxx not worth the effort... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx a bamboo flute xxx kamakura-style, rice planters xxx in umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx his face older xxx than the pine... xxx sweet jelly 
xxxxxx even living xxx in katsushika... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx sumida river xxx even more old-timey... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx amid the thunder's xxx rumble... xxx a reed thrush singing 
xxxxxx o reed thrush xxx which road is the dead end xxx of kasai? 
xxxxxx hey reed thrush xxx which way to ancient xxx naniwa? 
xxxxxx matsushima xxx barely in sight... xxx warble of a reed thrush 
xxxxxx from branches that block xxx the wind... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx disgraceful! xxx 'round the red-faced drunkard xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx even the little bamboo xxx isn't mine... xxx flitting fireflies 
xxxxxx flitting fireflies, xxx another annoying night xxx in the house 
xxxxxx big rain xxx big moon xxx cicada in the pine 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx a hot bath xxx and cicadas in the pines 
xxxxxx tired of listening xxx the man walks away... xxx cicada on a branch 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx house in the willows xxx morning moon 
xxxxxx glimmer of tea water xxx left out overnight... xxx a snail 
xxxxxx viewed in passing xxx after summer's first bonito... xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx summer's first bonito, xxx even at the mountain's edge xxx a taste of edo 
xxxxxx even in mountain shade xxx a taste of edo... xxx first bonito 
xxxxxx half of it showing xxx in the deep grass... xxx peony 
xxxxxx for the green willow xxx night rushes in... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx in a big swamp xxx just one bloom... xxx but it's a lotus! 
xxxxxx sparrows bathing xxx have scattered it... xxx lotus water 
xxxxxx lilies in bloom, xxx from morning on xxx sunset colors 
xxxxxx the melon cooling xxx two days now... xxx no one has come 
xxxxxx unexpected moonlight xxx shines down... xxx cooling melon 
xxxxxx a flitting butterfly xxx and green-leafed cherry tree xxx roped off 
xxxxxx round the lye bucket xxx a happy butterfly... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx in deutzia blossoms xxx the priest buries xxx the frog 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx the children play xxx funeral 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx in the water's gleam xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx in solitude xxx walking on oyster shells... xxx deutzia in bloom 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx an oyster shell mountain xxx and autumn's moon 
xxxxxx autumn begins, xxx i thought by now this journey xxx would've ended 
xxxxxx from the roof's overhang xxx three drops... xxx first autumn morning 
xxxxxx a cold morning, xxx but the same pine tree xxx as last year 
xxxxxx facing the gate xxx of elder brother... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx a pounding pestle xxx completes the scene... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx the field's smoke xxx crawls into my sleeves... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx from elsewhere another horse xxx neighs in reply 
xxxxxx even the pestle xxx becomes part of the scene... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx every time i go out xxx the horse neighs... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx tone river's xxx farewell to autumn... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx cawing in the tree xxx are you a widow, crow? xxx milky way above 
xxxxxx shaded by thicket, xxx the moon breaks through... xxx my house 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx on a clear, rainless night xxx elsewhere! 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx people on the stone xxx with pale faces 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx even in kyoto xxx growing old 
xxxxxx watching the bridge xxx as evening falls... xxx autumn sky 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx not a soul in sight xxx the back gate 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx not a soul in sight... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx he's just like me xxx the snail 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx for a lonely pine xxx day's end 
xxxxxx the sold pony xxx looks back at mother... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx in katsushika xxx falling in the distance... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx all night looking xxx at my wrinkled hands... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx a rainy autumn evening's xxx long walk 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx a beggar looking xxx sizes me up 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the cicadas' grumbling xxx is louder 
xxxxxx does this autumn wind xxx come from the mountain xxx of swords? 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx on my pilgrimage xxx to which hell? 
xxxxxx the little pine tree xxx puts on a show... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx next to the fence xxx a foot-washing tub... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx bit by bit xxx trimming the horse's hooves... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx festival at the mountain's foot, xxx in the cauldron xxx an autumn gale 
xxxxxx travelers set out xxx the sun rises... xxx a world of morning dew 
xxxxxx autumn mist, xxx the river beach's pinks xxx barely visible 
xxxxxx autumn mist, xxx the river beach's pinks xxx have bloomed in a flash 
xxxxxx when the mist clears xxx a mountain... xxx of fire chips 
xxxxxx from a hand that holds xxx a bucket of sacred branches... xxx mist rises 
xxxxxx from a hand xxx pricked by sacred shikimi... xxx mist rises 
xxxxxx even at a house xxx shrouded in mist... xxx a festival 
xxxxxx my dear one's house xxx behind it a field xxx of flowers 
xxxxxx tiny sandals xxx made of red paper... xxx for the ancestor 
xxxxxx when the bell tolls xxx for the ancestors... xxx dewdrops scatter 
xxxxxx the bon festival xxx flickers out too... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx evening wind, xxx for the tree-less gate xxx a tall bon lantern 
xxxxxx someone else's affair xxx you think... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx an isolated house xxx in mountain shade xxx but a festival dance! 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx the old man doesn't know xxx the dance 
xxxxxx tanabata night xxx in kyoto, the same xxx autumn mountain 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx in a mountain nook too xxx tanabata stars 
xxxxxx sky over kazusa, xxx is my star up there xxx prowling? 
xxxxxx muen temple's bell xxx clangs too... xxx great fireworks 
xxxxxx autumn sumo tournament, xxx from day one xxx mountain clouds 
xxxxxx heading straight xxx to the wildflowers... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx making the crane xxx feel lonely... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx was there ever xxx an older looking scarecrow? xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx in the outcastes' village too xxx a lovely night... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx evening cloth-pounding, xxx a cycad tree wrapped xxx in a reed mat 
xxxxxx even the bald mountain xxx isn't left out... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx a sakaki tree planted xxx for good luck... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx when he starts to make love xxx mountain rain 
xxxxxx his dying place xxx fairly well thatched... xxx crying deer 
xxxxxx sing, quail! xxx if my hut bothers you xxx i'll close it 
xxxxxx all people must xxx grow old... xxx the snipe rises 
xxxxxx will i grow old xxx like you? xxx autumn butterfly 
xxxxxx don't be bewildered xxx by the cold weather! xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx dragonfly, xxx flying two feet xxx then two feet more 
xxxxxx the katydid next door xxx clear xxx as a bell 
xxxxxx that grass over there xxx won't be cut... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx a burned field xxx but soon he's singing... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx surviving the flood xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx fish frolic about xxx on foot... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx in the rain gutter too xxx wildflowers xxx have sprouted 
xxxxxx lasting five, six days xxx at the gate... xxx wildflower 
xxxxxx fish frolicking xxx on foot... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx surviving the flood xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx in the mum garden xxx sprouting all at once... xxx weeds 
xxxxxx even in the thicket xxx beyond the bramble gate xxx a little chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx a splash for the white xxx chrysanthemum... xxx hand-wash water 
xxxxxx chrysanthemums bloom xxx with ease... xxx river's edge 
xxxxxx in poor soil xxx little by little it blooms... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx a standing priest xxx a standing crane... xxx field chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx amid the mosquitoes xxx standing tall 
xxxxxx red-leaf ivy, xxx lipstick is applied xxx to the roof 
xxxxxx the shinano road xxx through blooming buckwheat... xxx a swath of cloth 
xxxxxx buckwheat blossoms xxx enough for the buddha xxx and me 
xxxxxx on a barren mountain xxx it bloomed in a flash xxx buckwheat 
xxxxxx the woodpecker too xxx engulfed in sunset... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx the birds have left xxx the chopped down pine... xxx evening's red leaves 
xxxxxx following the man xxx who shoulders a winnow... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx acting fidgety xxx in the flood... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx acting absent-mindedly xxx they encountered the flood... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx outside of sleeping xxx lacking good sense... xxx rose of sharon 
xxxxxx an unlevel hedge, too xxx in bloom... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx three drops of rain xxx and it's drenched... xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx with light hearts xxx the grasses bloom... xxx gourds 
xxxxxx the bird flies off xxx making a mental note... xxx the big gourd 
xxxxxx in the gloom of night xxx bit by bit it grows... xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx did others sit here too xxx waiting for spring? xxx old tatami mat 
xxxxxx a good dream xxx for the year's end? xxx lacquered pillow 
xxxxxx my sleeping place xxx just thatched yesterday... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx my very first night xxx sleeping here... xxx winter rain on bamboo 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx no one to talk to... xxx evening 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx in three-foot wide lodgings... xxx my night 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx in a little ditch smoke xxx and bamboo tongs 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx a street singer at dusk xxx hunkers to the ground 
xxxxxx in first snowfall xxx though slurping only hot water... xxx my home 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx tomorrow's smoke one xxx bundle of straw 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx in the bamboo evening xxx sleeping alone 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx my home village in a hole xxx in the wall 
xxxxxx thicket's chrysanthemum xxx on a day of hailstorm... xxx blooms 
xxxxxx heavy frost xxx on the old house, its owner xxx in the ground 
xxxxxx adding to xxx my solitude... xxx frost on the window 
xxxxxx rain on withered fields xxx resounds... xxx my pillow 
xxxxxx withering fields, xxx oh for a bite to eat xxx in my hut! 
xxxxxx safe and sound xxx on basho's death-day... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx in western mountains xxx a nightingale already? xxx a monk beats his bowl 
xxxxxx a monk beats his bowl, xxx by now a dent xxx in the mountain! 
xxxxxx shining moon, xxx the year's end fair xxx on mount matsuchi 
xxxxxx year's end fair xxx "what's he doing here?" xxx they ask 
xxxxxx at my home xxx the flies too, a year older... xxx seacoast 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx all night the sound xxx of mountain rain 
xxxxxx empty charcoal bag, xxx in the mud so quickly xxx trampled 
xxxxxx wood fire, xxx oh happy age! xxx on every face 
xxxxxx under tall oaks xxx in the mountain's shade xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx fighting the mountain wind xxx on foot... xxx a wren 
xxxxxx little wren xxx despite your cheeping xxx the day ends 
xxxxxx breaking out in song xxx at the evening rain... xxx wren 
xxxxxx a plover lives xxx in one of my walls... xxx evening 
xxxxxx "this evening in the barley field xxx so pretty!" xxx sings the plover 
xxxxxx this evening in the barley field xxx so pretty... xxx a plover is singing 
xxxxxx "the field of barley xxx so spring-like!" xxx sings the plover 
xxxxxx an oak leaf this morning xxx fallen xxx in the tofu tank 
xxxxxx at dawn a keepsake xxx left on the window xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx a new year begins, xxx before sunrise xxx a pine-decorated boat 
xxxxxx it's become xxx a first month scene... xxx snow on the mud 
xxxxxx birds singing, xxx on a tatami mat in a field, too xxx happy new year 
xxxxxx my spring, xxx one charcoal ball xxx and a bundle of greens 
xxxxxx a cracked kettle xxx and the rising sun... xxx this too is spring 
xxxxxx the new spring xxx turns moonlit night... xxx my wrinkled face 
xxxxxx spring's beginning xxx and bright moon are elsewhere... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx the offbeat clomping xxx of clogs... xxx must be spring! 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx even for a gate xxx without grass 
xxxxxx spring comes too xxx to the weed-thatched house... xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx two houses, three, four... xxx an evening xxx of kites 
xxxxxx a kite, xxx mokubo temple settles xxx into evening 
xxxxxx mountain shade, xxx deep in a thicket xxx a kite 
xxxxxx on this misty day xxx sleeping through new year's? xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx one bucketful xxx for buddha... xxx morning herbs 
xxxxxx picking herbs xxx the heron also xxx seems lonely 
xxxxxx herb garden, xxx picking one, he shouts xxx "over here!" 
xxxxxx the earth mound's xxx part of it indeed... xxx a fine spring day 
xxxxxx even from the gable xxx clear blue sky... xxx a spring day 
xxxxxx exposing my spine xxx to the spring sun... xxx this year 
xxxxxx on the spring day xxx all day, rain... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx spring day, xxx visible even after sunset xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx grating on sand xxx the big ferryboat... xxx late sunset 
xxxxxx in falling rain xxx in kyoto too xxx dusk of spring 
xxxxxx for the painted faced xxx maiden too... xxx spring dusk 
xxxxxx counting the windows xxx of shimogyo town... xxx spring dusk 
xxxxxx for the wisteria in the pine, too xxx spring's dusk xxx this evening 
xxxxxx the little owl xxx makes a face... xxx spring dusk 
xxxxxx water spider xxx on spring's last day xxx blushing 
xxxxxx road to nara, xxx a crow caws xxx at spring's last day 
xxxxxx rice field crane xxx again, come on down! xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the black gate xxx just half visible... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx ducks waddle-waddle xxx to the gate 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx to the dinner tray's edge xxx the tea grove 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx the morning moon xxx is a clam shell 
xxxxxx the spring breeze xxx blows in the dark... xxx house on the shore 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the clay doll xxx gets some color 
xxxxxx on the tip of the pole xxx the tea strainer dries... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx shallow river, xxx on hands rinsing a kettle xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx spring moon, xxx if i touched it xxx it would drip 
xxxxxx the spring moon xxx in a raindrop from the eaves... xxx falls again 
xxxxxx even at dawn xxx spring haze hovers... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx green moss, xxx all the way to my lap xxx spring's rainbow 
xxxxxx grilling sardines xxx in a mountain field... xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx thin mist, xxx night after night xxx vegetable soup 
xxxxxx at the back window xxx the same person... xxx mist 
xxxxxx the misty day, too xxx viewed out back... xxx my humble hut 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx in evening mountain's shadow xxx candyman's flute 
xxxxxx peeking in, peeking out xxx of the mist... xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx thieving crow! xxx under a cloak xxx of spring mist 
xxxxxx the post is wiped xxx all clean... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx even my sleeve xxx is one with the mist... xxx evening 
xxxxxx standing deep inside xxx the heat shimmers... xxx weeds 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx traces of a dear friend's xxx walking stick 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx umbrella-hat's handprints too xxx a sign of spring 
xxxxxx moonlight halos xxx the house... xxx spring water 
xxxxxx blades of grass xxx are plucked for their sake... xxx equinox dumplings 
xxxxxx even in mountain shade xxx is it peach day? xxx sugar vendor 
xxxxxx come, monkey! xxx come, peach boy! xxx herb cakes 
xxxxxx even at my home xxx herbs for cake turn green... xxx evening 
xxxxxx the herb picker xxx reaches... xxx for the setting sun 
xxxxxx where i saw xxx a pretty bird... xxx they burn the mountain 
xxxxxx another mountain xxx set on fire... xxx the haze thickens 
xxxxxx dead grass burning, xxx on my eyebrows pattering xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx sowing herbs, xxx the smell of fish cooking xxx a little past noon 
xxxxxx his looking for a wife xxx makes him sociable... xxx stray cat 
xxxxxx the stray cat too xxx goes wife-hunting... xxx nightfall 
xxxxxx even the wild cat xxx looks for sex... xxx peeking in the gate 
xxxxxx wild cat, xxx after making love xxx he's the town pet 
xxxxxx no break for the bird's nest xxx to dry... xxx mountain rain 
xxxxxx from night onward xxx rain... xxx birds who've left the nest 
xxxxxx "there's human goblins xxx in the fields and mountains!" xxx bird leaving the nest 
xxxxxx asakusa, xxx on the day the swallows fly xxx rented clogs 
xxxxxx blades of grass xxx swish in the tide... xxx a swallow flies 
xxxxxx blades of grass, xxx swallows start arriving xxx so pretty 
xxxxxx high tide xxx and a happy morning... xxx swallows flying 
xxxxxx a swallow, xxx not at all bothered xxx by my smoke 
xxxxxx the swallows, too xxx avoid it this year... xxx patch of weeds 
xxxxxx a happy night xxx even among the rushes... xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx yesterday it wasn't there xxx mountain field 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx bedded down in tall grass xxx a horse's face! 
xxxxxx poking his face xxx into the haystack... xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx is it hard leaving behind xxx the rape flowers? xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx celebrating the rain xxx in the reeds xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx sunset, xxx tears shine in a frog's eyes xxx too 
xxxxxx on one knee xxx the moonlight... xxx frog in the evening 
xxxxxx looks almost xxx like frogs hopping! xxx rain on the grass 
xxxxxx in grassy shade xxx such rude grumbling... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx in grassy shade xxx what's that grumbling? xxx evening frog 
xxxxxx frogs singing, xxx "tonight let the weeds xxx grow taller!" 
xxxxxx in leafy shade xxx deciding not to croak... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx even in a sparse thicket xxx "this is our night!" xxx croak the frogs 
xxxxxx in the waste threads xxx yesterday's dewdrops... xxx spring butterfly 
xxxxxx clinging to the edge xxx of the reed mat... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx clinging to xxx the pestle's trough... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx two houses with piss-poor xxx gardens 
xxxxxx flitting butterfly, xxx after dinner, a temple xxx pilgrimage 
xxxxxx a flitting butterfly xxx outstrips me... xxx paper sandals 
xxxxxx birds singing xxx butterflies flitting... xxx old tatami mat 
xxxxxx even when planting xxx two or three eggplants... xxx little butterflies 
xxxxxx now on, now off xxx the hairdresser... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx at machiguchi xxx night falls so fast... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx a little person xxx enters the scene... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx my hut xxx the butterfly's sleeping place xxx tonight 
xxxxxx for two or three days xxx its pure fun... xxx for silkworms 
xxxxxx a sickle moon, xxx hands groping xxx for pond snails 
xxxxxx even the clams xxx are related to the great xxx men of old 
xxxxxx parsley pickers, xxx don't let the crane xxx think you're clumsy! 
xxxxxx one more dawn xxx for the flowering mustard... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx the rain cleared xxx recently, i see... xxx dripping bracken 
xxxxxx i wonder who picked xxx all this? xxx skinny bracken 
xxxxxx turning gold xxx budding branches overspread... xxx outcaste's home 
xxxxxx giving holy binzuru xxx a rub... xxx the budding tree 
xxxxxx my hut's camellias, xxx not a shoddy one xxx among them 
xxxxxx a calf's face xxx stretches forward... xxx camellias 
xxxxxx i'll put on shell-sandals xxx too! xxx village plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx the sound of a three-penny xxx flute 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx in a mountain nook xxx somebody's house 
xxxxxx plum blossoms scatter xxx in the sky, nine a.m. xxx to one p.m. 
xxxxxx unconquered xxx by the smell of broiled eels... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx my kimono cuffs xxx are last year's rags... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx through the garden's fallen xxx plum blossoms, footprints... xxx he was big! 
xxxxxx in cuffs dragging xxx through the dirt... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx while i slept, xxx night unfurled all kinds xxx of plum blossoms 
xxxxxx catching its breath xxx on the pine tree's root... xxx plum blossom 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx they've come to see edo xxx child tourists 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx in a metal tub xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx even the hot water vendor xxx lingers... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx not giving a damn xxx that cherry blossoms fall... xxx his stern face 
xxxxxx in scattering blossoms xxx i've lived too long... xxx evening 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx even the clay saigyo xxx looks merry 
xxxxxx bloom, cherry trees! xxx izen's snoring xxx may stop 
xxxxxx rain on blossoms, xxx under a hemp tarp xxx his stern face 
xxxxxx blossoming mountain, xxx the little food shop xxx lost in mist 
xxxxxx from behind me xxx they blow...cherry blossoms! xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx feeding the whole xxx neighborhood... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx though my rice sack xxx is empty... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms xxx on the spring mountain... xxx another hot water? 
xxxxxx it's how the village xxx makes a living... xxx cherry trees in bloom 
xxxxxx peach blossoms, xxx at the gate he weighs xxx the cat 
xxxxxx green willow, xxx jointly owned by neighbors xxx a tea-drinker's bridge 
xxxxxx dawn's glow xxx even more of a wonder... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx in dawn's glow xxx even more of a wonder... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx waiting and waiting xxx for sunset... xxx the willow tree 
xxxxxx a willow stands xxx at the entrance gate... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx annoyingly xxx it hides one wall... xxx willow 
xxxxxx willow tree graft, xxx tomorrow you leave xxx the hut 
xxxxxx the earth-dyed cotton xxx looking happy too... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx in sweltering heat xxx sunshine kills... xxx my poor head! 
xxxxxx summer night, xxx the disdained gate's xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx crushed xxx under the fifth month rain... xxx my home 
xxxxxx for my empty belly xxx the wind blows... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx billowing clouds xxx on the move... xxx before my umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx a reedy place, xxx in summer moonlight, distant xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx sings too... xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx chilled amid the green xxx rice field... xxx back into the hot tub 
xxxxxx barnyard grass too xxx rustles, rustles... xxx like the green rice field 
xxxxxx a happy sight, xxx on purification evening xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx evening purification, xxx a splash of water on bamboo xxx will do 
xxxxxx my life, xxx if i die may the bamboo blinds xxx still be green 
xxxxxx after re-papering xxx the first thing i fan... xxx weeds 
xxxxxx with my wastepaper fan xxx striking poses... xxx alone 
xxxxxx evening shadows, xxx rain pitter-patters xxx on my fan 
xxxxxx all the bought water xxx is for the bamboo... xxx evening 
xxxxxx even water sprinkled xxx at the gate earns money... xxx life in edo 
xxxxxx my nose xxx to a wooden fence... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx every evening xxx at the canal's edge... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx the toad who comes out xxx i call "lucky" 
xxxxxx this falling rain xxx feels like last year... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx after the trumpet-shell's xxx blast, another... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx in grass, in trees xxx the army of the genji... xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx a rain sprinkle...they're off xxx to matsura lagoon! xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx every evening xxx even in the dirty bamboo... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx on the moonlit spider web xxx an evening xxx cicada 
xxxxxx cicada chorus, xxx for the butterfly too xxx no sunburn 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx covering the pears xxx a paper bag 
xxxxxx does the red dawn xxx delight you xxx snail? 
xxxxxx snail, xxx the butterfly in a mad xxx hurry 
xxxxxx day flowers xxx along with the hay... xxx clipped 
xxxxxx lotus blossom, xxx a dragon once rode you xxx people say 
xxxxxx dusting off xxx my ankles... xxx irises blooming 
xxxxxx the sunlight behind xxx is irritating... xxx blooming irises 
xxxxxx while looking at them xxx sunlight hits... xxx blooming irises 
xxxxxx the melon xxx can't sink completely... xxx the well 
xxxxxx kamo river, xxx after making a melon soak xxx the moon sets 
xxxxxx a hedge where no priests xxx enter... xxx deutzia in bloom 
xxxxxx a person-shaped xxx hole beckons... xxx deutzia blossoms 
xxxxxx little morning-glories xxx big morning-glories... xxx it's ninth month! 
xxxxxx so cold in morning's cold, xxx vegetable vendor xxx winnow vendor 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx the toad's eyes too xxx open wide 
xxxxxx green willow at the gate xxx rustling... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx even the replanted xxx melon blooms... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx dawn is your time xxx for dancing... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx even tortoise and crane xxx meet their fate... xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx a moonlit house xxx by a sewer 
xxxxxx the village fires xxx burn anciently... xxx a moonlit night 
xxxxxx going out xxx to get soup stock... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx on musashi plain xxx complementing a house... xxx autumn moon 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx over the dog's toilet too xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx the backstreet xxx is the dog's toilet xxx first snowfall 
xxxxxx mountain moon, xxx father pulls the bell rope xxx his child prays 
xxxxxx almost a harvest moon xxx burning pine needles... xxx saga field 
xxxxxx in some sky xxx rain isn't falling... xxx harvest moon night 
xxxxxx rain falling, too xxx on sumida's river beach... xxx harvest moon night 
xxxxxx after renting the house xxx the first thing: moon gazing xxx twice 
xxxxxx after renting the house xxx moon-gazing there... xxx twice 
xxxxxx a big rain, xxx on the moon-gazing boat xxx watching it fall 
xxxxxx tonight's moon, xxx i, too, am staying xxx in musashi! 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx even while moon gazing xxx praising buddha! 
xxxxxx ninth month moon, xxx in the mountain's shade xxx a food festival 
xxxxxx the mountain's blooming xxx buckwheat hides it... xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx no fear xxx of autumn rain's downpour... xxx mountainside house 
xxxxxx he rakes pine needles xxx for tomorrow's tea, perhaps... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the deer stands close xxx to the husk bucket... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the cut grass xxx sticks to my feet... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx autumn rain... xxx mountainside house 
xxxxxx mountain field, xxx pigeons cooing xxx in autumn rain 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx trusting in the buddha... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx an autumn wind's xxx blowing! blowing! night... xxx open window 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx without even a house xxx the "big man" 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx topping the grasses xxx someone's face 
xxxxxx reaching the face xxx of buddha in his niche... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx water splashed xxx on the stone, on the tree... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx each time i look xxx autumn wind is blowing... xxx edo's sky 
xxxxxx my dead mother, xxx every time i see the ocean xxx every time... 
xxxxxx the morning mist xxx tangled xxx in the willow 
xxxxxx over one thicket xxx a custom-made shroud... xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx autumn mountain, xxx is he banging that gong xxx because he's alive? 
xxxxxx autumn mountains xxx one by one xxx the evening falls 
xxxxxx autumn mountains... xxx each mountain xxx each evening 
xxxxxx at my feet xxx sunset's rays, autumn xxx mountain 
xxxxxx bird sings again xxx bell tolls again... xxx autumn mountain 
xxxxxx in people's faces xxx the same darkness... xxx autumn mountain 
xxxxxx up to my doorway xxx the autumn field blooms... xxx rainy day 
xxxxxx at my ramshackle hut, too xxx night is cool... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx almost cold xxx drenched in grass... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx the pine breeze too xxx blows carefully... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx at the hermit's hut, too, xxx an upturned face awaits xxx the stars 
xxxxxx awaiting the stars, xxx even a turtle cools xxx his behind 
xxxxxx lined up perfectly xxx with the pine... xxx herder star 
xxxxxx a rush of red leaves xxx blown against him... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx one by one xxx the frigid gusts... xxx bird clapper 
xxxxxx mount asa, xxx even when cloth-pounding stops xxx sweet nostalgia 
xxxxxx new house, xxx here too, three or four xxx cloth-pounders 
xxxxxx rising smoke xxx towering pine, then... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the owl comes xxx to lend a hand... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx remote province, xxx even in the haunted field xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx i leave my chrysanthemum xxx for the evening... xxx fresh-brewed sake 
xxxxxx high tide, xxx splish-splash xxx goes the buck 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx tries to hide xxx in bush clover 
xxxxxx do you think you're hiding xxx in that bush clover? xxx face of a deer 
xxxxxx this mountain rain xxx and the deer's tears xxx must be mingling 
xxxxxx only after the woodpecker xxx flies... xxx back in my hut 
xxxxxx the woodpecker returns xxx to the pine... xxx now i'm old 
xxxxxx the woodpecker works xxx one spot... xxx all through sunset 
xxxxxx the woodpecker xxx pecks it to death... xxx the post 
xxxxxx honking geese, xxx i picture skies xxx over inns 
xxxxxx just today and tomorrow xxx left of autumn! xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx an insect chirps, xxx yesterday it wasn't there xxx hole in the wall 
xxxxxx cricket, xxx you too have adapted to life xxx in edo 
xxxxxx katydid, xxx "katy-katy!" not dead xxx yet 
xxxxxx not a thicket xxx for a katydid's singing xxx in sight 
xxxxxx even in the barn's shade xxx if there's grass xxx there's autumn blooms 
xxxxxx even in the sky xxx buddha dwells... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx trust in the buddha... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx blocking the gate, xxx morning-glories xxx and a slob 
xxxxxx into morning-glories xxx with one shoulder bare... xxx holy man 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx and loads of children... xxx farmhouse 
xxxxxx lost xxx in the morning-glories xxx little house 
xxxxxx droplets forming xxx on the morning-glories... xxx sitting still 
xxxxxx in morning-glories xxx a chill chilling xxx my spine 
xxxxxx in the morning-glories xxx warming up... xxx the cold 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx even in sewer mud xxx a morning scene 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx even in sewer mud xxx greet the dawn 
xxxxxx selling morning-glories xxx wet with morning dew... xxx a tough character 
xxxxxx voice of the bell, xxx the morning-glories are the first xxx to stir 
xxxxxx on the busy gate, too xxx morning-glories xxx bloom 
xxxxxx my house's pitiful xxx morning-glories, too xxx greet the dawn 
xxxxxx on one branch xxx tumbling head over heels... xxx autumn colors 
xxxxxx mountain field, xxx the mouse's hole too xxx under red leaves 
xxxxxx in autumn frost xxx lushly blooming again xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx they crowd to bloom xxx facing the sea... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx late-blooming roses of sharon xxx four or five... xxx mosquitoes whine 
xxxxxx a babbling brook xxx chills the sake... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx roses of sharon, too xxx have passed their season... xxx mosquitoes whine 
xxxxxx roses of sharon xxx on peaks, in valleys xxx all the way to takaya 
xxxxxx even the willow xxx is lonely... xxx rose of sharon 
xxxxxx night after night xxx a good wind blows... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx the moon emerges xxx 'round a curve... xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx all the mountains xxx are looking old... xxx gourds 
xxxxxx with the emptiness xxx of bare trees... xxx this year ends 
xxxxxx for me and the pine xxx this damned year, too xxx ends 
xxxxxx its mouth open xxx waiting for spring? xxx paper dog 
xxxxxx waiting for spring xxx sparrows also make a home xxx in the bamboo 
xxxxxx year's end, xxx the bell of my death place xxx tolls too 
xxxxxx year's end, xxx when will my turn come xxx temple bell? 
xxxxxx bamboo thicket, xxx on the year's last day, too xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx the crows of kasai xxx happily caw 
xxxxxx just existing xxx i exist... xxx snow flitting down 
xxxxxx night snow, xxx in a hush people xxx passing 
xxxxxx hurry along! xxx in nighttime hail xxx on wooden clogs 
xxxxxx expecting a night xxx of spring... xxx night frost 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx the pine tree's head too xxx swept for soot 
xxxxxx pine breeze, xxx in the middle of a field too xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx gliding into evening... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx the gate is the sparrows' xxx playground 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx the holy man's goose, too xxx alive and well 
xxxxxx at night a sound xxx like rice cake pounding... xxx the nettle tree 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the usual evening rain... xxx pounding rice cakes 
xxxxxx come, come, snow! xxx the young pine needs xxx new clothes 
xxxxxx a pure land temple's xxx bell of old age... xxx listen! 
xxxxxx falconry, xxx a barley field's rising sun xxx on one sleeve 
xxxxxx plain, light-blue xxx skullcaps... xxx sprinkled in 
xxxxxx with a plain, light-blue xxx skullcap... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx in a flash my home's xxx dressed to the nines... xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx every evening xxx you're also more depleted... xxx charcoal bag 
xxxxxx rain falling, xxx tomorrow's chance of firewood xxx is nil 
xxxxxx by the wood fire xxx comparing our wrinkles... xxx mount kagami 
xxxxxx banked fire, xxx gulls clamor xxx in the redbud tree 
xxxxxx banked fire, xxx the mountain pine wind xxx at my pillow 
xxxxxx when the deer cries xxx the red leaves too xxx fall like tears 
xxxxxx moonlight! shadow! xxx even en route to yoshiwara xxx winter's withering 
xxxxxx a man's shadow, xxx even on st. jizo's monument xxx winter withering 
xxxxxx even for winter's withering xxx an indifferent face... xxx sea gull 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx departing from mother xxx the pony's face 
xxxxxx another year xxx just taking up space... xxx thatched hut 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx no plum blossoms yet xxx this first month 
xxxxxx even my house xxx is all decked out... xxx the emperor's spring 
xxxxxx does the spoonbill too xxx hear the begging actors? xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx with your dinner trays xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx sleeping through xxx the new year's celebration... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx on aimochi bridge xxx spring has sprung... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx rain from the eaves xxx drip-drip... xxx a late sunset 
xxxxxx forest ranger, xxx he sweeps away spring xxx with a broom 
xxxxxx departing spring's xxx sky turns dark... xxx mountain pass 
xxxxxx down to two leaves xxx the lonely morning-glory... xxx spring frost 
xxxxxx shelter in the reeds, xxx even when i turn over xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx not missing xxx the spring rain's blessing... xxx blades of grass 
xxxxxx spring rain xxx on an ancient road... xxx the pickle vendor 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx there's one window xxx per person 
xxxxxx through a window big xxx as an umbrella-hat... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the mop on the fence xxx drying 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx let the grass also xxx drink sake! 
xxxxxx temple mountain, xxx under a spring moon heading xxx to a poem party 
xxxxxx every evening xxx in raindrops from the eaves... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx bit by bit xxx more haze, more moon... xxx secluded temple 
xxxxxx in the misty day xxx no window can be seen... xxx a prison 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx grasses at the gate xxx at noon 
xxxxxx on one sleeve xxx rain pitter-patters... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx fat little sparrows xxx in the farm field too... xxx in mist 
xxxxxx spring mist, xxx not taking up a hoe xxx a shameless loafer 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx our dwelling too xxx in mist 
xxxxxx draping the mountain xxx village's sleeping face... xxx mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx the mosquito-breeding thicket xxx is pretty too 
xxxxxx in my dear one's house xxx not one provincial doll xxx on doll's day 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even the doll's face xxx made of weeds 
xxxxxx their colorful umbrellas xxx fluttering... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx plowing the rice field xxx dewdrops fall too... xxx entrance gate 
xxxxxx plowing fields, xxx festivals, festivals xxx all over! 
xxxxxx back road, xxx even on top of grasses xxx sowing herbs 
xxxxxx mountain field, xxx "nice job of seeding!" xxx sing the birds 
xxxxxx the nightingale aims xxx and arrives... xxx my fence 
xxxxxx mountain crows xxx bring the mountain nightingales xxx when you come 
xxxxxx hey nesting swallows, xxx grassy green mountains xxx are elsewhere 
xxxxxx flying swallows, xxx wherever there's grass xxx hail great japan! 
xxxxxx entrusting the thicket xxx to the field crow... xxx the lark sings 
xxxxxx mount ashigara's xxx mountain pheasant, xxx celebrate the haze! 
xxxxxx hilltop pheasant xxx are you jealous of the heron's xxx style? 
xxxxxx around noon, squawking xxx the pheasant walks xxx through town 
xxxxxx even in mountain shade xxx a plowed field! xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx geese fly north, xxx how they yearn to see xxx mount sarashina 
xxxxxx the geese i know xxx by sight, are they gone? xxx rice field of nara 
xxxxxx frogs croaking, xxx "this rain on the grass xxx is unsanctioned!" 
xxxxxx in adashi field xxx the butterflies seem xxx sinless 
xxxxxx behind me a butterfly xxx west toward matsuhara xxx crawls 
xxxxxx o goddess ichihime xxx smile! xxx a meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx casting a spell xxx on the man... xxx meadow butterflies 
xxxxxx in katsushika xxx even in the outhouse... xxx a spring butterfly 
xxxxxx gate after gate xxx making the rounds... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx heron on a post, xxx butterflies in a breathless xxx flurry 
xxxxxx meadow butterflies, xxx the cow also xxx gazes 
xxxxxx flitting butterfly xxx to buddha's lap xxx returns 
xxxxxx the new grass xxx cools my cold rice... xxx humble hut 
xxxxxx in the new grass too xxx evening comes... xxx chirping sparrow 
xxxxxx chiding the new grass xxx for not being ready... xxx sunset bell 
xxxxxx straggly violets, xxx here, too xxx the moon's dwelling 
xxxxxx a swish-swish xxx deep in the thicket... xxx flowering mustard 
xxxxxx flowering mustard xxx drapes the back... xxx my home 
xxxxxx in the thicket no one xxx knows about xxx trees budding bright 
xxxxxx springtime xxx yet it blooms reluctantly... xxx the camellia 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even lying-down cows xxx look at camellias 
xxxxxx in plain old everyday xxx plains and fields... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx may the wind send xxx this plum blossom scent xxx to kyoto! 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx even the weasel passes xxx with a song 
xxxxxx wrapped in the scent xxx of plum blossoms... xxx little house 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx through a needle's eye xxx the light 
xxxxxx even weeds under the tree xxx smell nice... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx wiping greasy hands xxx on plum blossoms 
xxxxxx that dog ought to poop xxx pure gold! xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx scattering blossoms, xxx today too xxx like olden times 
xxxxxx up close xxx even the cherry blossoms of ueno xxx pass on 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx i also hear a temple bell xxx from my twenties 
xxxxxx in cherry blossom shade xxx there are even those xxx who hate this world 
xxxxxx from now on xxx cherry blossom solitude! xxx my window 
xxxxxx on mount ubasute xxx where the old were left to die... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx most end up xxx stuck in mud... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx an idler, xxx under the cherry blossoms xxx i live 
xxxxxx even in sleep xxx pigeons come to coo... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx no one says xxx "first cherry blossoms!" xxx my humble hut 
xxxxxx cherry trees in bloom xxx with no crowds... xxx castle mountain 
xxxxxx all night xxx under the cherry blossoms xxx nagging 
xxxxxx vacant temple, xxx industriously blooming xxx peach and cherry 
xxxxxx vacant temple, xxx cherry trees blooming xxx industriously 
xxxxxx japan's night sky xxx has become xxx all willows 
xxxxxx lined up xxx with the evening mountain... xxx a willow 
xxxxxx in summer's early dawn xxx a nettle tree... xxx back window 
xxxxxx in summer's early dawn xxx a bird comes chirping... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx the moon shining, xxx no carousing xxx this summer night! 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx for each little village xxx one little hill 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx a buddha of healing xxx in a thicket 
xxxxxx in a cloudburst xxx another festival shrine xxx passes by 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx hanging over the village xxx that doesn't pray 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a wildflower blooms xxx at my pillow 
xxxxxx only when a scrap of cloud xxx billows to form peaks... xxx then to bed 
xxxxxx when i go back to sleep xxx it quickly forms peaks... xxx little cloud 
xxxxxx when i go back to sleep xxx it quickly forms peaks... xxx little cloud 
xxxxxx only when a scrap of cloud xxx billows to form peaks... xxx then to bed 
xxxxxx at my humble hut, too xxx celebration smoke xxx for green rice fields 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow xxx imagining the green rice field xxx is mine 
xxxxxx buddha's birthday, xxx fat little sparrows xxx and their parents 
xxxxxx picking flowers, xxx everyone with a different xxx style of fan 
xxxxxx a butterfly deigns xxx to come and dance... xxx summer flowers 
xxxxxx a cool wind today xxx the first of the month... xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx irises on the eaves, xxx before they shrivel xxx to bed i go 
xxxxxx new summer robes, xxx the town today xxx at the low-tide beach 
xxxxxx a "good fortune!" wish xxx even for the pigweed... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx sunset bell, xxx one ear covered xxx with my paper fan 
xxxxxx smoke rising, xxx the bats' world, too xxx is good 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx laughing at the man xxx in the burning house? 
xxxxxx cuckoo may be laughing xxx at the people's xxx struggling lives 
xxxxxx even a penny teahouse xxx a happy thing! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx mountain cuckoo, xxx the cherry blossoms of shinano xxx have bloomed! 
xxxxxx when you step one foot xxx on the mountain... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx my hut's firefly xxx still hasn't starved xxx to death 
xxxxxx skinny firefly xxx on the big boat's mast xxx clinging 
xxxxxx my house xxx where the town's fireflies xxx hide out 
xxxxxx my gate, xxx lodging for the fireflies xxx there being no grass 
xxxxxx in my thicket xxx at the end of their time... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx a thing to celebrate! xxx the mosquitoes of kazusa xxx feast on me too 
xxxxxx everything has burned xxx even the blameless xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx while swatting a fly xxx today again... xxx the mountain temple bell 
xxxxxx sharing the sunset xxx with the pony... xxx a snail 
xxxxxx one little tub xxx one lotus xxx one evening falls 
xxxxxx lotus blossoms, xxx the beggar's smoke xxx wafts over 
xxxxxx among lotus blossoms xxx the swallows don't xxx grow old 
xxxxxx lucky the toad xxx crawl out! xxx lotus blossom 
xxxxxx misty rain, xxx let the lilies in the desolate field xxx bloom! 
xxxxxx the bamboo shoots suffer xxx this crappy world's xxx storm 
xxxxxx the scrawny plum tree xxx is fruitless too... xxx my life 
xxxxxx ninth month, xxx the sky wears a colorful xxx kimono 
xxxxxx the blooming pink xxx rallies its spirits... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx the pink flaunts xxx a single bloom... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx people's voices, xxx in the grove the cold night xxx isn't 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx a cold night's xxx night walker 
xxxxxx a chill running xxx up my spine... xxx chilly clouds 
xxxxxx chilly, chilly xxx the sun deigns to rise xxx behind me 
xxxxxx yet another traveler xxx overtakes me... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx children xxx on autumn's last day... xxx a ruckus! 
xxxxxx taking no notice xxx of such a moon... xxx little house 
xxxxxx on a soot-grimed xxx straw mat too... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx a face used to its blast xxx in his mountain home 
xxxxxx behind me xxx the autumn wind blows xxx me home 
xxxxxx under which star xxx is my home? xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx morning-glories shiver xxx as they sprout... xxx an autumn gale blows 
xxxxxx soon enough xxx for the murderer too... xxx dew on the grass 
xxxxxx dewdrops forming, xxx on the hill, of course xxx smoke rising 
xxxxxx dewdrops on the grass xxx at first so happy! xxx so cool! 
xxxxxx in beads of dew xxx one by one my home xxx village 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx a rain shower party xxx for the wild grasses 
xxxxxx is that dew xxx the horse's tears? xxx autumn mountain 
xxxxxx such cool air! xxx tanabata clouds xxx and evening 
xxxxxx tanabata night, xxx a single eggplant xxx standing up 
xxxxxx the boy star xxx beams his smile... xxx through the trees 
xxxxxx the sumo champion xxx and the dawn... xxx classics 
xxxxxx once upon a time xxx he was the champ... xxx humble cottage 
xxxxxx evening, xxx the wind also chills xxx the sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx scarecrows standing, xxx a house without rice cakes xxx can't be found 
xxxxxx the pine saplings xxx looking pretty... xxx a scarecrow 
xxxxxx facing my way xxx in the cold rain... xxx a scarecrow 
xxxxxx that farmer xxx draining his rice field... xxx lonely too? 
xxxxxx the rice field guard xxx also watches... xxx water drains away 
xxxxxx in yoshino's xxx ancient night... xxx someone pounding cloth 
xxxxxx rice field geese, xxx not a single voice xxx sounds old 
xxxxxx once they settle down xxx another clamor... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx wind is blowing xxx and so the geese xxx are honking 
xxxxxx geese honking xxx hasten the evening... xxx little house 
xxxxxx evening wind, xxx the geese turn around xxx honking 
xxxxxx the day is short xxx as is the life xxx of the dragonfly 
xxxxxx leaving the morning-glory xxx songless... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx over wildflowers xxx soup steam wafts... xxx autumn festival 
xxxxxx chrysanthemums bloom xxx with ease... xxx riverbank 
xxxxxx chrysanthemums bloom xxx with ease... xxx river's edge 
xxxxxx among my pitifully xxx thatched eaves... xxx a chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx born again xxx morning-glories make xxx autumn bloom 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx they also aren't tired xxx of blooming 
xxxxxx dancing monkey, xxx its face also xxx isn't weary 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx on the saw scrap heap xxx bloom 
xxxxxx is that dew xxx the horse's tears? xxx rice blossoms 
xxxxxx even where the puppy xxx sleeps... xxx red fallen leaves 
xxxxxx a fluffy pillow xxx for the young buck... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx oppressed by creepers xxx roses xxx of sharon 
xxxxxx roses of sharon xxx despite the scolding crows xxx survive 
xxxxxx chestnuts dropping xxx one by one... xxx the night deepens 
xxxxxx little chestnuts xxx how often are you xxx stepped on! 
xxxxxx little chestnuts xxx pissed on by the horse... xxx shiny new 
xxxxxx a frozen bell clangs xxx on the mountain out back xxx at bedtime 
xxxxxx marking the end xxx of another year... xxx snowfall 
xxxxxx comparing my wrinkles xxx with the pickled plums... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx viewing plum blossoms, xxx they call old men xxx pickled plums 
xxxxxx come in snail xxx and live with me... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx festival sake xxx festooned with red leaves... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx mushrooms congregate xxx on the tree stump... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx on me, on the mountain xxx we take our turns... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx over the vendor's cooked food xxx evening's xxx winter wind 
xxxxxx winter wind xxx blowing in my sleeves... xxx sake, beans and rice 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx basking in the sun... xxx mount matsuchi 
xxxxxx falling snow xxx we'll sleep at my house xxx maybe tomorrow 
xxxxxx stuck in the wrinkles xxx of my knees... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx sleet falling xxx into steam rising... xxx rice cake tub 
xxxxxx hot water on rice xxx and i'm happy... xxx sleet falling 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx my teeth could crack radishes xxx up to last year 
xxxxxx frost on the grass xxx this damned year, too xxx the trampling begins 
xxxxxx facing a house xxx without sake... xxx night frost 
xxxxxx here and there xxx eggplants dangle too... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx all sorts of fools xxx moon-gaze too... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx ashamed, xxx eating then going to bed xxx i hear the winter prayers 
xxxxxx all the tea at hand xxx i unseal... xxx evening time 
xxxxxx in katsushika xxx they dump soot there too... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the twelfth month singers xxx don't turn around and look... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx hearing the winter quilt xxx unfold, here comes xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx is the horse also xxx growing old well? xxx snow sled song 
xxxxxx "great japan!" xxx join the snow sled song xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx the plum tree too xxx is soon snowed in... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx early winter seclusion, xxx whose thin smoke xxx over there? 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx the wild geese labor xxx till evening 
xxxxxx for three months xxx my winter seclusion... xxx old age 
xxxxxx wild boar, xxx it looks like you just xxx woke up 
xxxxxx wind blows, xxx the wild boar's sleeping face xxx so innocent 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx only the puppy's face xxx is innocent 
xxxxxx trampling my house xxx to pieces, are you? xxx flock of plovers 
xxxxxx winter hay xxx and smoke from tea grounds... xxx sweet nostalgia 
xxxxxx why so slow xxx withering? xxx little thicket's hedge 
xxxxxx lacking good sense xxx out-of-season flowers xxx on the fence 
xxxxxx even on new year's day xxx around here edo xxx is countrified 
xxxxxx for the turtle too xxx it's the first month xxx first day 
xxxxxx may the gods grant xxx prosperity! xxx the emperor's spring 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx i send up my smoke xxx like everyone else 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the artless pigeon too xxx sings "it's spring!" 
xxxxxx even the smoke xxx rises anciently... xxx spring begins 
xxxxxx with no cards or letters xxx spring has begun... xxx thatched house 
xxxxxx "spring's begun" xxx i say then see xxx the hole in the wall 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx the nettle tree snags xxx the kite 
xxxxxx the trainer lets xxx his monkey hold it... xxx new year's kite 
xxxxxx sound of a loom, xxx hidden in bamboo xxx a new year's kite 
xxxxxx sleeping through new year's xxx dreaming of plum blossoms xxx probably 
xxxxxx it being today xxx even in a nook of the hedge xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx appreciating xxx the falling snow... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx with a country twang... xxx springtime 
xxxxxx rising over xxx the swishing grasses... xxx spring sun 
xxxxxx spring sun, xxx over the swishing grasses xxx gliding up 
xxxxxx for the turtle on a rock xxx it's the usual xxx long day 
xxxxxx the back gate xxx opens on its own... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx the chicken stares xxx at the man... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx in the owl's opinion xxx every day xxx is long 
xxxxxx spring snow xxx on my narrow sleeves... xxx clinging 
xxxxxx spring snow sprinkles xxx the earth god's xxx festival song 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx rice cakes soaked xxx with spring snow 
xxxxxx going to see xxx mokubo temple's evening... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx for the mountain village xxx the usual first month... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the spring breeze xxx whistles through... xxx pond snail shells 
xxxxxx in spring's breeze xxx clutching chopsticks xxx the sleeping child 
xxxxxx over rice cakes and jelly xxx the good spring breeze xxx blows 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx the meal at the mountain's foot xxx marvelous 
xxxxxx through heat shimmers xxx the murmuring xxx rain 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx in that hole perhaps? xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx on devil's island xxx on buddha's death-day... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx even the sumo wrestler xxx has a blast... xxx doll festival 
xxxxxx by ones and twos xxx in little nooks they crouch... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx from a peach tree gathering xxx low tide shells 
xxxxxx threshing tea, xxx leaves fly at a fat sparrow's xxx face too 
xxxxxx sowing seeds to the edge xxx of the kettle's soot-pile... xxx herbs 
xxxxxx the blessed priest xxx won't see it in his next life... xxx grafted tree 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the crow laughs xxx at the branch i grafted 
xxxxxx even the stray cat xxx begging xxx for a wife! 
xxxxxx nestling, xxx even when people come xxx opening its mouth 
xxxxxx while i watch xxx he's off to make a living alone... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx after the nightingale drinks xxx water is drawn... xxx old well 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx what don't you know xxx about people? 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings, xxx no trace of a country xxx accent 
xxxxxx nightingale sings xxx a pestle pounds... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even on the little islands xxx buddha's law... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx baby swallows in the nest, xxx eyes glued xxx on the evening sky 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even the swallows sing xxx in celebration 
xxxxxx evening swallows, xxx no hope for tomorrow xxx for me 
xxxxxx through a gap xxx in the cloths for sale... xxx a skylark 
xxxxxx singing since morning xxx skylark, your throat xxx is parched 
xxxxxx singing lark, xxx little grasses too xxx become money 
xxxxxx getting used to drinking xxx the horse's water... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx a pheasant crying xxx the old woman's plot of wheat, too xxx all green 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx burnt black yesterday xxx this ancient pine 
xxxxxx the pheasant's cry sounds xxx half-hearted... xxx spring begins 
xxxxxx giving these skinny legs xxx new life... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx geese have gone, xxx the field's grass chafing xxx people 
xxxxxx the departing goose xxx drops an enormous xxx crap 
xxxxxx smell the buckwheat xxx in the thicket! xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx the traveling geese xxx check it out thoroughly... xxx sooty mat 
xxxxxx traveling geese, xxx the human heart, too xxx wanders 
xxxxxx from the tub in the reeds xxx a croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx next to my shadow xxx that xxx of a frog 
xxxxxx frogs croaking xxx the nights becoming xxx shorter 
xxxxxx in leafy shade xxx an old man's voice... xxx a frog! 
xxxxxx in leafy shade xxx gazing at the camellia... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx "come see xxx the crappy house at night!" xxx croak the frogs 
xxxxxx an evening frog xxx in rainy weeds sings xxx of old age 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the hoarse frog xxx keeps singing 
xxxxxx a butterfly on the wet xxx horse's leg xxx now and then, sleeps 
xxxxxx thicket bees xxx in the next life don't xxx be like me 
xxxxxx cogon grass, xxx the horse gazes xxx at plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the pony's xxx favorite neck-scratcher... xxx blooming plum 
xxxxxx the plum tree xxx rubbing the pony's neck xxx in full bloom 
xxxxxx at the thicket's edge xxx blooming on the sly... xxx plum trees 
xxxxxx glaring at the newcomer xxx with his umbrella... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx like the sky xxx over katsushika... xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx i've been living in edo xxx for this day! 
xxxxxx rain of cherry blossoms, xxx this year, too xxx i've sinned 
xxxxxx cherry blossom shade, xxx "that was good thunder!" xxx he says 
xxxxxx cherry blossom clouds, xxx leaving edo xxx tomorrow 
xxxxxx blossoming mountain, xxx even men who've knocked over buddha xxx are here 
xxxxxx for the poor xxx there's not a spring xxx without blossoms! 
xxxxxx even in falling rain xxx satisfied faces... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx behind me a dog xxx growls his distrust... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx bells and big drums xxx all stop... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossom guard, xxx not much xxx of a buddhist 
xxxxxx simply trust, xxx simply trust! xxx cherry blossoms in bloom 
xxxxxx the farm field too xxx is worth a look... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx in yellow roses xxx a great courtier's xxx thin kimono 
xxxxxx the village child xxx clutching the willow xxx sound asleep 
xxxxxx planting grass, xxx the nights are growing xxx shorter 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx this morning on my pillow xxx dewdrops 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx the crow scorns xxx my thatched house 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx they watch from two houses xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx looking again xxx looking again... xxx someone else's green field 
xxxxxx the sky colors xxx of dawn have changed xxx to summer clothes 
xxxxxx every time i put on xxx the summer kimono... xxx feel old 
xxxxxx such a moon! xxx yet he's under his fan xxx asleep 
xxxxxx as the moon was so bright xxx i had to cover my face with a fan xxx to sleep 
xxxxxx the rivers have xxx an ancient darkness... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx since you're in kyoto xxx look at that moon! 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx this year again, nothing xxx but weeds 
xxxxxx the cuckoo's becoming xxx a regular... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx cuckoo xxx moonlit night xxx every night 
xxxxxx making the nightingale xxx reach old age... xxx my thatched hut 
xxxxxx my fence where the nightingale xxx comes to sleep... xxx it too is old 
xxxxxx is my wrinkled hand xxx bad for walking? xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx while i'm gone xxx you and the nightingale are in charge xxx my snail 
xxxxxx fresh green leaves xxx blowing, blowing... xxx where i lie 
xxxxxx echigo mountains, xxx a chill runs up xxx my spine 
xxxxxx a chill runs up xxx my spine... xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx autumn chill, xxx my spine feels xxx the mottled mountain 
xxxxxx the goddess of spring xxx missed a few spots... xxx mottled mountain 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx this is nothing like xxx my home village 
xxxxxx departing clouds, xxx "autumn won't return" xxx the cicadas sing 
xxxxxx a glimpse of moon xxx over my home village... xxx then clouds 
xxxxxx even the moon xxx over my home village... xxx brings tears 
xxxxxx bright moon, xxx in a little thicket too xxx a festival! 
xxxxxx mountain mist, xxx the beautiful voice xxx of the dung-hauler 
xxxxxx does it delight xxx the village child? xxx bell for the ancestors 
xxxxxx on the ancestors' altar xxx without fail xxx a lucky wind blows 
xxxxxx you saw the bonfires xxx for the dead? xxx mountain rain 
xxxxxx now and then xxx a pine breeze... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx avoiding the wildflowers xxx he squats... xxx sumo champion 
xxxxxx the sumo wrestler xxx and the pine xxx grow old together 
xxxxxx a little party xxx in the red leaves... xxx mountain deer 
xxxxxx the hoe's a curse xxx i'm thinking tonight... xxx wild geese calling 
xxxxxx pulling shut xxx the window covers... xxx geese honking 
xxxxxx in the grassy meadow xxx how l-o-n-g you are! xxx red dragonfly 
xxxxxx people call it xxx the "buckwheat place" xxx red dragonfly 
xxxxxx the dragonfly's redness, xxx chased away xxx by people 
xxxxxx the dragonfly's tail, too xxx day by day xxx grows old 
xxxxxx from the eaves xxx one by one... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx blooming better xxx and better! xxx the festival chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx watered by xxx the village dog... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx snow country's xxx humongous morning-glories xxx have bloomed! 
xxxxxx down and dirty xxx just as is... xxx bush clover blooms 
xxxxxx after blooming day xxx twining 'round my legs... xxx bush clover 
xxxxxx barren bush clover, xxx softly, softly its blooms xxx have scattered 
xxxxxx the little crow xxx also weeps for joy... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx wipes his wet nose... xxx autumn leaves 
xxxxxx drawing near them xxx a sudden loneliness... xxx autumn leaves 
xxxxxx before people do xxx herons raise a clamor xxx "ice!" 
xxxxxx the year ends, xxx how long will that turtle xxx hang there? 
xxxxxx winter storm, winter wind, xxx the cow's sweat xxx blown away 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx the pig giggles xxx in his sleep 
xxxxxx from the deep heart xxx of shinano xxx snow is falling 
xxxxxx sleeping side by side xxx shinano's mountains too... xxx evening snow 
xxxxxx snowy day, xxx people of my village too xxx unwelcoming 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx what are you praying for xxx katydid? 
xxxxxx my grave too xxx will soon need his prayer... xxx a monk beats his bowl 
xxxxxx sweeping soot, xxx even the sparrow's bed xxx in the thicket 
xxxxxx grumble, grumble xxx the pigeon nags... xxx no gift of new clothes 
xxxxxx the pines of takasago xxx laughing... xxx the year's last day 
xxxxxx looking pitiful xxx in the blighted tree... xxx a skullcap 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx bamboo viewing... xxx wooden brazier 
xxxxxx paying no heed xxx that spring is coming... xxx the wood fire 
xxxxxx even holy jizo xxx is looking older... xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx for the nightingale xxx one is a hat... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx the crow xxx is thinking, "there's always xxx tomorrow!" 
xxxxxx ah well xxx the road is wretched... xxx year's first day 
xxxxxx a shiny-new year xxx has come again... xxx for my lice 
xxxxxx first month, xxx at the cat's grave too xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx first month, xxx in a nook of the village xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx my old coat, xxx a long first month xxx creeps by 
xxxxxx stand of trees, xxx even from poor grasses xxx flowering spring 
xxxxxx the wild daisies xxx are celebrating... xxx spring's first day 
xxxxxx a new spring xxx and a monkey! xxx viewed through my cuff 
xxxxxx spring's begun, xxx the sky over my house too xxx like old times 
xxxxxx while i slept xxx the plum tree bloomed! xxx lucky direction walk 
xxxxxx those plum blossoms too xxx must trust... xxx lowering the basket 
xxxxxx on the homecoming servant's xxx face too... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx on the servants' holiday xxx there's no hiding xxx the white hair 
xxxxxx soba field, xxx on the first day of rat xxx picking a pine tree 
xxxxxx stockpiling rice xxx for little new year's... xxx little nook of spring 
xxxxxx out of place xxx with the new year's pine... xxx my house 
xxxxxx putting on my xxx new year's clothes... xxx the mountain owl laughs 
xxxxxx new year's water, xxx an unfortunate soul xxx ladles it 
xxxxxx begging actors, xxx the olden times return xxx today 
xxxxxx now it's a springtime xxx befitting old men... xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx spring day, xxx the outhouse sandals xxx are new 
xxxxxx the nightingale's xxx throat is parched... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx even for the meadow xxx butterflies... xxx the day is long 
xxxxxx roly-poly pigeons xxx growing fatter... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx sumida river xxx from whence will spring's dusk xxx come? 
xxxxxx spring evening, xxx the bamboo fire-feeding pipe xxx is a treasure 
xxxxxx hole in the wall, xxx "blessed" spring's xxx night rain 
xxxxxx in spring rain xxx kamakura's sparrow's... xxx how they sing! 
xxxxxx home village, xxx spring rain on the grass xxx hoe festival 
xxxxxx to my dinner tray xxx evening's spring breeze xxx comes wafting 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx the great courtier xxx with sand in his hair 
xxxxxx a precious harp xxx a beggar's flute xxx deep in mist 
xxxxxx wafting through trees xxx a beggar's flute xxx a nightingale 
xxxxxx a poorly played flute xxx faintly, faintly... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers rise xxx even from my hand's xxx wrinkles! 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx tomorrow's sake price xxx on a little brushwood fence 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx yesterday it sang xxx pond snail shell 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx someone listening to xxx a snail shell 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx yesterday it sang xxx pond snail shell 
xxxxxx by doll festival time xxx not a decent cherry tree xxx blooming anywhere 
xxxxxx do you think xxx it's too smoky in here? xxx face of the doll 
xxxxxx the butterfly and sparrow xxx creep along with it... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx some stay behind xxx in the barley... xxx low tide crows 
xxxxxx the nightingale, too xxx has a merry song... xxx tea pickers 
xxxxxx even bird-eating birds xxx lose their nests xxx in the burning grass 
xxxxxx the butterfly sleeps, xxx until the burning field's smoke xxx covers it 
xxxxxx giving shade xxx for the farmer's plowing... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx just hearing a nightingale xxx is enough... xxx grafting a branch 
xxxxxx become the nightingale's xxx sleeping place... xxx my grafted tree 
xxxxxx after dark xxx now i want to fix it... xxx grafted tree 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent xxx sends him off carousing... xxx lazy cat 
xxxxxx are you planning xxx to leave your nest, little bird? xxx evening bell 
xxxxxx anchoring xxx the bird's nest... xxx the fence 
xxxxxx adding themselves xxx to the bird's nest... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even the turtle wants xxx to break into song 
xxxxxx not hushing up xxx for the nightingale... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx the nursing baby also xxx opens her mouth 
xxxxxx nesting swallows xxx what are you grumbling about? xxx darkness 
xxxxxx speeding along xxx a lazy day, the singing xxx of a skylark 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx the teardrop rain xxx of umewaka day 
xxxxxx its tail points xxx to the rising moon... xxx pheasant 
xxxxxx the field pheasant's xxx hiding place... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx mokubo temple, xxx even at dusk the pheasant xxx still crying 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx in the outhouse too xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx what's your point? xxx crying pheasant 
xxxxxx even the wild geese xxx leave it alone... xxx my home 
xxxxxx that croaking at the plum tree xxx is growing old... xxx frog 
xxxxxx even atop xxx the seaside dweller's rice... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx his mouth open xxx for the falling blossoms... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx ensconced behind xxx the day flower... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx mountain temple bell, xxx the frog too xxx must feel old 
xxxxxx watching me xxx with a grumpy face... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx on the offering shelf xxx does the butterfly also hear xxx buddha's promise? 
xxxxxx adashi field, xxx preceding the dewdrops xxx butterflies 
xxxxxx gate's butterfly xxx since dawn, how have you xxx kept yourself busy? 
xxxxxx if you like sake xxx butterfly, come! xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx a flying butterfly xxx broken by chopsticks... xxx wild plum 
xxxxxx spring's first butterfly xxx sleeps one night... xxx dog's bowl 
xxxxxx first butterfly, xxx before long some crow's xxx bite 
xxxxxx spring butterflies, xxx the cow has no desire xxx to be young again 
xxxxxx like a mountain bird's xxx cooing the rain... xxx flitting butterflies 
xxxxxx among the whitebait xxx a big mud turtle xxx plays too 
xxxxxx darting whitebait xxx suddenly are born... xxx night haze 
xxxxxx whitebait, xxx yesterday they parted ways xxx with the turtle 
xxxxxx in new grass xxx even i'm in fashion! xxx this year's sleeves 
xxxxxx new grass, xxx a sparrow and i xxx just playing 
xxxxxx in round numbers xxx about three hundred years... xxx violets 
xxxxxx flowering mustard xxx barging in, blooms... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx mustard flowers bloom xxx while lying down... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx flowering mustard, xxx even on a rainy night xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx tied to the trellis xxx it blooms no more... xxx wisteria 
xxxxxx the way things are, xxx the bark-stripper's plum trees xxx are in bloom 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx slurping it in xxx with the vegetable soup 
xxxxxx getting used to this blanket xxx of plum blossom scent... xxx straw mat 
xxxxxx tucked into folds xxx of plum blossom scent xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx plum blossoms gone xxx suddenly kyoto xxx looks old 
xxxxxx the owl xxx has a connoisseur's face... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx "well then, we'll teach you xxx how to die..." xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx that they're no good at dying xxx again can be seen... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx is even the beggar xxx singing a song? xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx among cherry blossoms xxx not so soldierly... xxx sir horse 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx how long xxx since olden times? 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx the sparrow takes xxx a blossom bath 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx a nightingale sings xxx i cry 
xxxxxx cherry trees in full bloom, xxx colds, no doubt xxx are spreading 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx birds with eyes stitched shut xxx singing 
xxxxxx rain of blossoms xxx and the tiger's tears... xxx let them mingle 
xxxxxx once again xxx there's a toll on the bridge... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx a cherry blossom xxx blizzard... xxx the dog's bowl 
xxxxxx tomorrow and tomorrow xxx will they still be? xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx polished to a shine xxx by my sweat... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the little boy xxx goes with his father... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx even the rice grinders xxx stop singing... xxx cherry blossoms scatter 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx to my lowly sleeve xxx they cling 
xxxxxx a plum blossom falls xxx to a low place... xxx scar from burning wormwood 
xxxxxx that they're no good at dying xxx again can be seen... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx "well then, we'll teach you xxx how to die..." xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx a soot-grimed xxx umbrella-hat too... xxx on cherry blossom day 
xxxxxx the cursed cedar xxx growing fat... xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx unaware xxx the tree is cursed... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx another day xxx of life's chaos 
xxxxxx under the cherry tree xxx in bloom xxx a little gambling shack 
xxxxxx rice cakes and jelly, xxx but too late xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx the buddha too xxx looks this way... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx hair decoration xxx for a bald man 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx the pine trees xxx stand guard 
xxxxxx his peach sapling xxx has blossomed... xxx though he never prays 
xxxxxx the servant returns xxx and welcoming him home... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx in mosquito territory xxx the double blossom xxx yellow roses 
xxxxxx yellow rose, xxx the cultivated grasses xxx blocking your sun 
xxxxxx the yellow rose xxx wants to hang around... xxx for the cuckoo 
xxxxxx even in little nooks xxx green willows... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx killing a chicken, xxx the willow at the gate xxx so green 
xxxxxx stitching together xxx the short summer nights... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx choking off xxx the cool breeze... xxx wild roses 
xxxxxx drip-drip xxx goes cool water... xxx bees have left their hive 
xxxxxx even where i sleep xxx the fifth month rain xxx sends its wind 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx paying no heed... xxx sleeves of the dancers 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx dewdrops in the grass xxx all shapes and sizes 
xxxxxx from the plume grass xxx the saint's pure water xxx flows 
xxxxxx the blooming pinks xxx folded over... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx the beehive dangles xxx heavily above... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx mountain's pure water, xxx though shaded by trees xxx it disperses 
xxxxxx deigning to guard xxx the pure water... xxx a stone buddha 
xxxxxx old weeds, xxx the festival's breeze xxx reaches them 
xxxxxx paying no heed xxx to buddha's birthday... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx a wisteria trellis xxx joins the fray... xxx buddha's birthday flowers 
xxxxxx growing old xxx with the early chrysanthemum xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx conducting the choir xxx of evening's insects... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx it reaches xxx the nightingale's bed too... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx a four or five foot xxx yellow rose trembles... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx at my humble hut xxx smoked by mosquito smudge... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx dewdrops, xxx evening's smudge pot smoke xxx over wildflowers 
xxxxxx thin legs, xxx while cooling myself appraised xxx by a horsefly 
xxxxxx the bats' home xxx getting on in years... xxx the post 
xxxxxx get a move on, bat! xxx it's dinnertime xxx in kyoto 
xxxxxx drinking cheap sake, xxx this cuckoo xxx this grove 
xxxxxx the nightingale, too xxx isn't growing old! xxx mountain sake 
xxxxxx from deep inside xxx the pretty flower... xxx a mosquito 
xxxxxx mosquitoes whine, xxx even the rustling bamboo xxx is slandered 
xxxxxx a great spot xxx to hear the cuckoo... xxx but mosquitoes! 
xxxxxx swatting a fly xxx but hitting xxx the buddha 
xxxxxx blades of grass, xxx utterly drenched the cicada xxx sings 
xxxxxx worn by only xxx a cicada... xxx cool kimono 
xxxxxx for the cicada too xxx with outstretched legs... xxx the noon sky 
xxxxxx in one village xxx late-summer bonito xxx and bright moon 
xxxxxx through day flowers xxx a large woman xxx makes her way 
xxxxxx in day flowers xxx "cricky! cricky!" cricket xxx sings 
xxxxxx day flower, xxx as red xxx as the devil's eggplant 
xxxxxx day flowers, xxx even on the smoke-covered xxx rocks 
xxxxxx enjoy the moonflowers xxx you gods xxx of the outhouse! 
xxxxxx moonflowers, xxx the pitter-pattering rain xxx a good luck god 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx the nightingale brings xxx her children 
xxxxxx peeling a melon xxx in the plume grass... xxx a breeze 
xxxxxx autumn begins, xxx lying down, looking at xxx snowy mountains 
xxxxxx first autumn morning xxx the mountain snow's wind xxx arrives 
xxxxxx for the neighing horse xxx the cold night xxx same as for me 
xxxxxx a pine tree xxx like none other... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx against the tree xxx by the gate a ladder... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx one and all xxx faces of the buddhas xxx cold tonight 
xxxxxx my paper lantern xxx is snatched away... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx o snail xxx how do you make your living? xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the owl is happy xxx in his solitude... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx with the moon out xxx it seems to shrink back... xxx little mountain 
xxxxxx no sight yet xxx of the rising moon... xxx holy men 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx how many nights now xxx that moon on the eaves? 
xxxxxx not looking smoky xxx through hot spring steam... xxx face of the moon 
xxxxxx under my bottom xxx the stone warms up... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx lit by the harvest moon xxx no different... xxx trashy house 
xxxxxx autumn heavens, xxx for one little bird xxx so vast 
xxxxxx trusting its fate xxx to the autumn wind... xxx duckweed 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx this year's crop... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx death draws closer xxx with every year 
xxxxxx through what teeth xxx i have left xxx autumn's wind whistles 
xxxxxx what do you think xxx of the silver dew xxx mr. scarecrow? 
xxxxxx in the silver dew xxx i'd like to sow seeds xxx of plume grass 
xxxxxx happily watching xxx the dewdrops forming... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx stinging bug xxx you too someday, some time... xxx dewy grass 
xxxxxx the swallow's steady xxx stare... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx scarecrows at dusk xxx darkening... xxx human faces 
xxxxxx stored away xxx with reverence... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx for people xxx and for scarecrows xxx the day ends 
xxxxxx despite your cries xxx young buck xxx rain falls on the mountain 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx his last cry xxx thin and long 
xxxxxx mountain deer xxx in bush clover dew... xxx wash your face! 
xxxxxx before the geese xxx can take their seats... xxx crows 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese xxx come first xxx to the poor town 
xxxxxx when a lantern comes xxx the insect breaks out xxx in song 
xxxxxx caged insect, xxx he's learned to sing xxx in all this smoke 
xxxxxx five or six trembling xxx rice plants... xxx my insect cage 
xxxxxx the insects' chorus xxx makes it smaller... xxx shrine 
xxxxxx buddha and spoons xxx the whole wide world! xxx insects singing 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx in its middle at a inn xxx an insect cage 
xxxxxx singing all xxx the cool night long... xxx caged insect 
xxxxxx a butterfly emerges xxx and flies away... xxx morning moon 
xxxxxx hey toad xxx the caterpillar will grow xxx and fly away! 
xxxxxx he, too, quickly learns xxx how cold the morning is... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx when will it become xxx a cricket's nest? xxx my white hair 
xxxxxx "the world is good! xxx good!" so say xxx the locusts 
xxxxxx not shrinking back xxx from the sunset... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx in grass where the wolf xxx shed his fur... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx wildflowers, xxx high over people's heads xxx the bell tolls 
xxxxxx out of the grasses xxx the inevitable xxx wildflowers! 
xxxxxx birds singing, xxx wild daisies too xxx are blooming 
xxxxxx in the musket's xxx line of fire... xxx a maiden flower 
xxxxxx decorating the puppy xxx bush clover xxx blooms 
xxxxxx children play xxx with the deer xxx bush clover blooming 
xxxxxx bush clover blooming, xxx the big dog xxx sound asleep 
xxxxxx every evening xxx not growing old... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx in one sleeve xxx the plume grass wind xxx buffets 
xxxxxx the autumn fly's xxx final sleeping spot... xxx paulownia leaf 
xxxxxx dropping plop! xxx onto the puppy... xxx one leaf 
xxxxxx after one day xxx among people... xxx one leaf left 
xxxxxx not a pretty sight xxx the paulownia leaf xxx wind-blown 
xxxxxx one by one xxx ignored by people... xxx mushrooms 
xxxxxx a "praise buddha!" xxx pops to my lips... xxx mushrooms 
xxxxxx pines shed their needles, xxx come mushroom-hunting time xxx who'll be here? 
xxxxxx among the reeds xxx on the year's last evening... xxx a wooden drum 
xxxxxx standing xxx in the dying year's sun... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx plum tree, xxx the dumping ground for xxx kyoto's soot 
xxxxxx bamboo soot-broom, xxx the horse's head too xxx by and by 
xxxxxx bamboo soot-broom, xxx the first nightingale's xxx singing spot 
xxxxxx sweeping soot xxx the sun sets in peace... xxx vegetable field 
xxxxxx sweeping soot, xxx plum blossoms at the gate xxx indifferent 
xxxxxx in the tree's shade xxx pounding rice cakes xxx for amida buddha 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx in kyoto all chickens xxx are awake 
xxxxxx in a sumiyoshi nook xxx growing a year older... xxx sea gulls 
xxxxxx despised xxx by the barrier guard... xxx a plover sings 
xxxxxx cornerstone, xxx on new year's morning xxx a bird without a nest 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx i have company xxx bird without a nest 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx a balancing act in her sleep... xxx pretty woman 
xxxxxx less and less first month xxx as nights pass by... xxx mist 
xxxxxx missing the boat xxx for first month... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx morning's laugh, xxx "how much do they cost, xxx spring's blossoms?" 
xxxxxx now with homeless eyes xxx i see it... xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx for this homeless body xxx of mine, spring's xxx first day 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx pretending the persimmon xxx is sweet 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx the paulownia tree too xxx grew up fast 
xxxxxx in the mop's xxx drying place... xxx my new year's pine 
xxxxxx making charcoal balls xxx one by one... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx in the long day xxx passing with mouth wide... xxx a crow 
xxxxxx at spring's last night xxx the owl xxx is nagging 
xxxxxx paying no attention xxx to the departing spring... xxx crows 
xxxxxx the little shrine xxx is all azaleas... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx today too xxx looking at the same mountain... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx mud-dumplings too xxx gifts from afar 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx better than the flowers of others xxx my little thicket 
xxxxxx the spring breeze xxx blows all evening too... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx drying in the grass xxx a paper dog 
xxxxxx spring wind, xxx even in the pillar's hole xxx pollen 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx on a night journey to see xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx even at night a market stand xxx on naniwa bay 
xxxxxx accusing the pine xxx of foolishness... xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx to my window xxx he comes as usual... xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx the evening bath xxx slish-slosh... xxx mist 
xxxxxx it's my umbrella-hat xxx don't run, geese! xxx first mist 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx the vines people loathe... xxx beautiful 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx yesterday it wasn't there xxx tea-and-dumpling shop 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx for sparrows at the gate xxx good as a harvest moon! 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx at the gate the sparrows' xxx new year's bash! 
xxxxxx "i'm the first xxx of the migrating servants!" xxx a crow 
xxxxxx umbrella-hat and skirt xxx in the evening... xxx threshing tea leaves 
xxxxxx a plowman facing xxx sunset... xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx a skylark sings, xxx a man facing xxx sunset 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx the homeless cat, too xxx cries for love 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx dandied up like genji xxx at the fence 
xxxxxx settling into xxx the penny toss hole... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx chasing the crow xxx ten or twelve yards... xxx mother sparrow 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx inside a person's fist xxx its first cry 
xxxxxx fledgling faces xxx peek out the nest... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx hushes to listen... xxx tea-picking song 
xxxxxx accompanying the rain xxx with its tail... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx seeing off xxx the departing geese... xxx little pines 
xxxxxx an auspicious xxx twenty fifth day... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx traveling geese xxx my lake is crossed xxx in no time 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits xxx as if wanting nothing xxx in this world 
xxxxxx butterflies flitting, xxx pretty little bamboo shoots xxx shooting up 
xxxxxx nothing else blooming xxx but rape... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx wisteria trellis, xxx behind it, in the light xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx i tell you spring xxx is a night thing 
xxxxxx the plum tree xxx where the stray cat carouses xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even in summer xxx plum trees bloom 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx the edict board furnished xxx with sacred sake 
xxxxxx simply trust! xxx cherry blossoms flitting xxx down 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx bad buddhists xxx carousing 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms! xxx country nightingales xxx country candy 
xxxxxx one cherry tree xxx has kept blooming... xxx the corrupt world 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx the cherry blossoms late xxx the bonito...late 
xxxxxx for the eyes green leaves xxx mountain cuckoo xxx first bonito 
xxxxxx a windy place! xxx but one cherry tree xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx fifty years xxx of gazing, gazing... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx in a sumiyoshi nook xxx blooming xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx simply trust! xxx cherry blossoms fall xxx pit-a-pat 
xxxxxx even the frog's eyes xxx can't turn away... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx green with envy, xxx blooming cherry trees xxx little house 
xxxxxx the old cherry tree xxx blooming xxx till it drops 
xxxxxx my mean peach tree xxx nice and chubby xxx with blossoms 
xxxxxx peach tree in bloom, xxx but first a prayer xxx for the dewy barley 
xxxxxx green willows, xxx at ten different holes xxx gamblers tossing pennies 
xxxxxx rustling xxx in goddess kannon's heart... xxx the willow 
xxxxxx planting a willow, xxx someday, in summer xxx who'll enjoy its cool air? 
xxxxxx again there is splendor xxx beyond the gate... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx coming now xxx is it a kiso cloudburst? xxx mount asama 
xxxxxx under the cloudburst xxx standing tall... xxx lamps in the grove 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx there's not a gate xxx without a pink 
xxxxxx extending from my pillow xxx in the downpour... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx every evening xxx "rain is coming!" xxx cloud watchers 
xxxxxx night festival, xxx a big cloudburst xxx strolls through 
xxxxxx in the pine breeze xxx the saint's pure water xxx flows 
xxxxxx raising it for xxx my summer seclusion's view... xxx little pine 
xxxxxx a praying mantis xxx at the base of mount fuji xxx clings 
xxxxxx it's mount fuji's grass xxx but no trace xxx of cool air 
xxxxxx though i can straddle xxx this mount fuji... xxx cool grass 
xxxxxx no mount fuji xxx i can almost straddle xxx this year 
xxxxxx let's thatch with irises, xxx mount asama's smoke xxx looks calm 
xxxxxx swallows return xxx on the day eaves are thatched xxx with irises 
xxxxxx from the mountain xxx i see my own gate... xxx summer banner 
xxxxxx pit-a-pat pearls xxx of sweat drip down... xxx rice plants 
xxxxxx it's the nightingale's xxx dinnertime... xxx i change to a summer robe 
xxxxxx new summer robe, xxx from morning on used xxx by the pine 
xxxxxx kasuga field's deer xxx sniff it... xxx my summer kimono 
xxxxxx first day of summer xxx my summer kimono... xxx rustic 
xxxxxx watching the whiteness xxx of summer kimonos... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx a boor with the ladies xxx but he puts one on... xxx thin summer kimono 
xxxxxx tomorrow night and the next xxx the same? xxx in my mosquito net, alone 
xxxxxx stopping to count xxx my mosquito net's holes... xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx high noon, xxx inside the mosquito net xxx wildflowers blooming 
xxxxxx stroke victim, xxx even holding a paper fan xxx an ordeal 
xxxxxx smoking out mosquitoes, xxx soon the fireflies xxx are gone too 
xxxxxx veiling the face xxx of the evening moon... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx they're all slandering xxx my rice field! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx stitching her eyes shut xxx makes the bird cry... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx a pillow xxx for the fawn... xxx azalea bush 
xxxxxx growing up xxx with the bush clover... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx mokubo temple xxx even at night can be seen... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx hey cuckoo xxx did you call out? xxx logs for the temple 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx in a province without rice fields xxx splendid 
xxxxxx it has a sky xxx for singing cuckoos... xxx farmhouse 
xxxxxx three raindrops xxx and three or four xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx a softly blowing xxx world-improving breeze... xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx into my pitiful kettle xxx one by one... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx "come, fireflies!" xxx a single stalk of bamboo xxx makes my night 
xxxxxx sparkling fireflies, xxx even the frog's mouth xxx gapes 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx fireflies dampen xxx the thin tatami mat 
xxxxxx the pesky mosquito's xxx birthplace... xxx temple flower 
xxxxxx do you also miss xxx your mother? xxx cicada 
xxxxxx the world-healing xxx bamboo! little thicket! xxx cicada chorus 
xxxxxx come what may xxx won't you trust in the buddha xxx snail? 
xxxxxx it's buddha's rain xxx that's falling! xxx snail 
xxxxxx the peony has bloomed! xxx the whole day xxx sparrows chirping 
xxxxxx the cat's bell tinkling xxx in the peonies xxx here and there 
xxxxxx at my hut, xxx rascally crows xxx emaciated peonies 
xxxxxx staring at the shoots xxx of new bamboo... xxx buddha 
xxxxxx "grow, grow, grow xxx melons!" xxx buzz the bees 
xxxxxx thick drapes over xxx the deutzia blossoms... xxx willow 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx by lantern light xxx i bury the frog 
xxxxxx blooming deutzia, xxx both of us xxx buddha's devotees 
xxxxxx a plum drops xxx and then another... xxx beads of dew 
xxxxxx without fanfare xxx they've borne plums! xxx trees in the field 
xxxxxx mountain mansion, xxx the plum trees xxx stand ripening 
xxxxxx moon in the autumn dawn, xxx to the pretty sky flies xxx a mosquito 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx hangs over it... xxx rice cake gift 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx i tell you it's cold xxx on shinano mountain! 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx wherever you are xxx someone's annoyed 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx the weaned pony xxx goes to market 
xxxxxx o snail xxx how do you make your living? xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx the horse drinks xxx medicine too... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx even in sarashina xxx one by one... xxx rainy autumn nights 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx mist covers up xxx the wood shavings 
xxxxxx about halfway xxx burned out... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx katydid, xxx caught by someone xxx waiting for the stars 
xxxxxx awaiting the stars xxx throwing out tea grounds... xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx the wild pony xxx is led away from kiso... xxx his tail waving goodbye 
xxxxxx the cricket's song xxx is accompaniment... xxx the rice field drains 
xxxxxx evening smoke, xxx on the man playing pigeon flute xxx it hangs 
xxxxxx for pine and bamboo xxx it's like olden days... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx like in old china xxx yoshino, too, clonks... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx this year's sake, xxx first toast: xxx to the weeds! 
xxxxxx in deep grass xxx a quail sings... xxx grandma starches clothes 
xxxxxx migrating birds, xxx how many of your flocks xxx have overtaken me? 
xxxxxx migrating birds xxx haven't you seen me before xxx in japan? 
xxxxxx bagworm, xxx hanging in the plum tree xxx his job 
xxxxxx bagworm, xxx hanging from flowers xxx his job 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx suddenly light breaks xxx toward the lake 
xxxxxx atop the magistrate's xxx folding fan... xxx a locust 
xxxxxx flying locusts, xxx the willow tree too xxx grows old 
xxxxxx on the raw slices xxx of first day, eighth month... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx all together xxx the locusts in a humming xxx mood 
xxxxxx grasses and bush clover xxx clog it with blooms... xxx doorway 
xxxxxx over the bush clover xxx under the bell-flowers xxx mosquitoes whisper 
xxxxxx "praise buddha! xxx all praise to amida buddha!" xxx manjusa flower 
xxxxxx the rice i planted, xxx i know it xxx by sight 
xxxxxx four or five rice stalks xxx at my gate... xxx evening falls 
xxxxxx the nightingale struts xxx crunch crunch... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx even the suckling xxx kitten watches... xxx falling leaf 
xxxxxx red roses of sharon xxx enough to cool xxx a man 
xxxxxx little chestnuts xxx it's not yet your day xxx to burst 
xxxxxx a reedy place, xxx from the gate onward xxx gathering mushrooms 
xxxxxx the horsefly calls xxx "surely the mushrooms xxx are this way!" 
xxxxxx "this way xxx to the mushrooms!" xxx the horsefly flies 
xxxxxx one by one, xxx even the mouse's hole xxx has mushrooms 
xxxxxx it suits me, xxx even the former owner's xxx winter cold 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx what are you praying for xxx katydid? 
xxxxxx will i be the next one xxx you caw over? xxx crows 
xxxxxx homeless, too xxx seeing in the new year xxx in edo 
xxxxxx even cows and horses xxx with new year's faces... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even the horse xxx with a new year's face 
xxxxxx taking stock xxx of this old body... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx great edo, xxx even for a monkey without tricks xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx shimogyo town, xxx in the dark before dawn xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx for my life too xxx help arrives... xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx just two green leaves xxx my blossoming spring 
xxxxxx muddy clogs xxx at the gates reveal... xxx it's spring! 
xxxxxx how do the words xxx "spring's begun" strike you? xxx ueno hill 
xxxxxx even my ramshackle xxx hut, home xxx to the new year's god 
xxxxxx big field, xxx the late homecoming servant xxx late plum blossoms 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx behind the graveyard's pines xxx the wind 
xxxxxx new year's day, xxx a one-penny kite, too xxx in edo's sky 
xxxxxx the monkey with xxx a dancer's fan... xxx a tear rolls down 
xxxxxx morning shadows, xxx someone who has parents xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx tottering in the seaside xxx rice field...for the crane too xxx the day is long! 
xxxxxx the long spring xxx finally at an end... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the young sparrows xxx clamor at spring's xxx last day 
xxxxxx crossing the field xxx with a paper lantern... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx in spring rain xxx chasing the elusive fish... xxx dog on the shore 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx showing a sake cup xxx calling foxes 
xxxxxx in spring rain xxx a bit bedraggled... xxx tone river crane 
xxxxxx pigeons mating xxx crows mating... xxx the spring rain falls 
xxxxxx seeing it xxx on a spring breeze night... xxx my house 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx completely gone now xxx the holy men 
xxxxxx in the spring breeze xxx already casting shadows... xxx irises 
xxxxxx father's steady glare xxx another thing xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx in spring mist xxx three pines, two cranes xxx husband and wife 
xxxxxx at the gate xxx so many in the mist! xxx sumida river cranes 
xxxxxx at my humble hut xxx so many in the mist! xxx sumida river cranes 
xxxxxx hurry into mist xxx hurry, hurry! xxx a bird set free 
xxxxxx from evening mist xxx the bell xxx of life passing 
xxxxxx in one spot xxx the crows congregate... xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx the geese awake xxx "snow is melting! xxx melting!" 
xxxxxx a winter's worth of snow xxx melting... xxx a humongous moon 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx tonight a fat round xxx moon 
xxxxxx melting snow, xxx the morning voices xxx of pilgrims 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx where ducks are nesting xxx soft moonlight 
xxxxxx "snow's melting! melting!" xxx pigeons celebrate xxx in the tree 
xxxxxx this same hazy night xxx somewhere else... xxx the doll festival 
xxxxxx the beggar child prays xxx with trembling voice... xxx for a doll 
xxxxxx looking like she's enduring xxx my crappy house... xxx the doll 
xxxxxx first one to blow xxx on the hot herb cakes... xxx mount tsukuba's east wind 
xxxxxx herb cakes, xxx the garden's nightingale xxx wants this one 
xxxxxx from the tip xxx of the nightingale's beak xxx the tide rushes out 
xxxxxx sparrows chirp xxx in a garden nook, here too... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx now and then the deer xxx stand close by... xxx tea pickers 
xxxxxx what day then? xxx all the hut's sparrows xxx leave the nest 
xxxxxx sing, sing! xxx orphan sparrow... xxx so quiet 
xxxxxx she cries and attacks xxx the human goblins... xxx mother sparrow 
xxxxxx "beware the human goblins!" xxx is that what you're chirping? xxx mother sparrow 
xxxxxx living in harmony, xxx the sparrow has xxx both parents! 
xxxxxx evening, xxx how the orphan sparrow xxx cries! 
xxxxxx asakusa, xxx behind the house mount fuji xxx and a singing lark 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx a single skylark... xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx completing xxx the green mountain xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx looking like ants xxx people at dusk... xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx the sake bucket, xxx where the pheasant xxx goes to sing 
xxxxxx the crying pheasant xxx teases it with his tail... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx my hut's thin xxx thread of smoke... xxx a pheasant's cry 
xxxxxx with that mouth xxx he could vomit a cloud... xxx toad 
xxxxxx my evening, xxx a village dog barks xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx a buddha-praising goose xxx flies too 
xxxxxx in a mood for farewell xxx farewell! xxx the wild geese 
xxxxxx to the returning geese xxx i'm just a useless xxx so-and-so 
xxxxxx don't go, geese! xxx now i'm unlocking xxx the house in the trees 
xxxxxx teaching how to xxx praise buddha... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx on a flower petal xxx clucking his tongue... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx stand of trees, xxx the inevitable croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx evening shadows, xxx separated from his friends xxx a frog croaks 
xxxxxx aware of the sun xxx setting, the butterfly xxx flits away 
xxxxxx kiso mountains, xxx butterflies fill your sky xxx so briefly! 
xxxxxx butterfly flitting, xxx i too am made xxx of dust 
xxxxxx she had a husband xxx when the year was new... xxx widow butterfly 
xxxxxx the flitting butterfly xxx not bothered at all... xxx smoke 
xxxxxx what a shame, xxx the butterfly flits off xxx to the other shore 
xxxxxx shame, shame! xxx on the month's last day xxx a meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx shame, shame! xxx on the month's last day xxx i'm as penniless as a meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx "hey bagworm xxx are you ready?" asks xxx the flitting butterfly 
xxxxxx first butterfly xxx don't get caught up! xxx horse dung raking 
xxxxxx living on the mountain xxx i'm used to the bees... xxx evening pillow 
xxxxxx sunset, xxx a ruckus of cherry blossoms xxx a ruckus of trout 
xxxxxx "be brave, cherry blossoms xxx and fall!" xxx the little trout 
xxxxxx the bamboo grass shade xxx an empty hope... xxx little trout 
xxxxxx darting to the rhythm xxx of blossoms falling... xxx little trout 
xxxxxx little trout xxx swimming west while blossoms xxx flow east 
xxxxxx letting clams xxx vomit mud... xxx a moonlit night 
xxxxxx mountain grass, xxx soon as it sprouts xxx it's sold 
xxxxxx the grasses too xxx are in their youth... xxx flock of sparrows 
xxxxxx the dandelions too xxx have shaved heads... xxx festival day 
xxxxxx straggly violets, xxx the cherry blossom spring xxx has passed 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx born just today... xxx blooming violets 
xxxxxx in a sumiyoshi nook xxx violets have xxx their capital 
xxxxxx in a sumiyoshi nook xxx blooming xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx his detested wife's xxx violets... xxx all have bloomed 
xxxxxx violets blooming, xxx the camellia spring xxx has passed 
xxxxxx do your headwaters horde xxx all the violets? xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx herb cake herbs xxx join in the rustling xxx violets 
xxxxxx flowering mustard, xxx the little courtesan xxx worries about her sleeves 
xxxxxx deep mountain trees, xxx soon as buds appear xxx they're eaten 
xxxxxx plum blossom lovers xxx who planted plum trees... xxx parents 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx spreading into the countryside xxx lice of edo 
xxxxxx the child xxx clutches them tightly... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even in the country bowing xxx to plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx to be alive like this xxx is a wonder... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx among cherry blossoms xxx a long stay xxx in this world 
xxxxxx amid cherry blossoms xxx he speaks bluntly... xxx old man 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx residents of this world xxx a short time 
xxxxxx ripples on water, xxx mingling with cherry blossoms xxx an old clog 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx my life too is heading xxx downhill 
xxxxxx blossoms scatter, xxx my years too xxx on a downhill slide 
xxxxxx all by itself xxx without any help... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms xxx in a nook in this floating xxx world of craving 
xxxxxx in falling blossoms xxx growling to amida buddha... xxx temple dog 
xxxxxx rain of cherry blossoms, xxx not a face xxx without a fan 
xxxxxx cherry blossom shade, xxx a fox spirit xxx has enchanted me! 
xxxxxx just touching xxx the cherry blossom petals xxx brings tears 
xxxxxx even my inner devil, xxx come out, look! xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx in the evening xxx my usual journey... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx a defiled priest, xxx before the cherry blossoms xxx he stands 
xxxxxx stubborn they are xxx even while trampled... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx at the outcastes' temple xxx with cool defiance... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the puppy is escort xxx on the pilgrimage... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx the devil's horns xxx snap off! xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx where goddess kannon xxx is found, expect xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx before blooming xxx they already seduce... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry tree, xxx the same blooming splendor xxx for father emperor 
xxxxxx hey cherry blossoms, xxx why the rush xxx to scatter so soon? 
xxxxxx ripples on water, xxx fair to middling xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx "get ready, get ready xxx for death!" xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx to saintly eyes xxx they are bodhisattvas... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms xxx brush my sweaty underwear... xxx windblown 
xxxxxx fall, cherry blossoms, xxx stop up xxx their foul mouths! 
xxxxxx even to these old eyes, xxx cherry blossoms! xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx how they bloom xxx even in the west... xxx cherry trees 
xxxxxx mountain cherry trees, xxx the blossoms quite xxx sickly 
xxxxxx seeing the mountain xxx cherry blossoms... xxx i miss my teeth 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms, xxx the devil is moved xxx to tears 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms, xxx today too xxx like olden times 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx even the cherry blossoms xxx a bit annoying 
xxxxxx yellow roses, xxx hidden in the grass xxx they rustle 
xxxxxx in the summer night xxx out the back door too... xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx summer's early dawn, xxx in a dark little corner xxx a willow 
xxxxxx hot night, xxx in an edo nook xxx rude words 
xxxxxx i gaze at straw sandals xxx with stripes... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx evening at the gate, xxx a cool sky xxx coming soon 
xxxxxx a cool breeze, xxx the katydid brims xxx with energy 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx a gift from buddha... xxx pine by the grave 
xxxxxx in this cool air, xxx grateful drops xxx of evening dew 
xxxxxx cool summer air, xxx viewed from the mountain xxx a big sitting room 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx a dark little nook xxx on sumida river 
xxxxxx cool moon xxx and a cool pine tree xxx standing 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx pressing on my chest xxx chichibu mountain 
xxxxxx with dignity xxx in the cloudburst drooping... xxx willow 
xxxxxx little festival, xxx people in the tree shade xxx while it pours 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx an enormous morning-glory xxx has bloomed! 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx the maiden flower xxx happy by herself 
xxxxxx in an old, old kettle xxx from olden times... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx evening shadows, xxx he throws pure water xxx on the horse 
xxxxxx flute pratice, xxx the rice fields one and all xxx so green! 
xxxxxx kasuga field's deer xxx also attend... xxx buddha amid birthday flowers 
xxxxxx village children xxx and crows mingle... xxx buddha amid birthday flowers 
xxxxxx traveling crow xxx at edo's purification... xxx now you're old 
xxxxxx traveling crow xxx at edo's purification... xxx how many years? 
xxxxxx toad parents xxx bring their children... xxx evening purification 
xxxxxx evening's shrine boats, xxx about ten snipes xxx stand guard 
xxxxxx purification hoop, xxx the first three times xxx for mother 
xxxxxx plague gods lag behind xxx others in the lead... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx plague gods, xxx how wise of them xxx drifting west 
xxxxxx plague gods, xxx setting them on the water xxx heavy traffic 
xxxxxx night storm, xxx i rely on my little xxx plague god 
xxxxxx bullheads sing, xxx he fishes the moonlit xxx mountain stream 
xxxxxx bullheads splash, xxx he fishes the moonlit xxx mountain stream 
xxxxxx night fishing, xxx the pleading xxx of a katydid 
xxxxxx grow old xxx with the cormorant fisherman xxx little pine 
xxxxxx the cormorant fisherman xxx tends to his cormorants... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx beyond the pretty xxx grasses... xxx a cormorant boat 
xxxxxx wind wafting xxx it now sets forth... xxx cormorant boat 
xxxxxx watching wildflowers xxx flit and flutter... xxx cormorant boat 
xxxxxx the man's child xxx tends to the cormorant... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx evening dew hangs xxx on the man who watches... xxx cormorant boat 
xxxxxx in their new summer robes xxx today too... xxx mountain, little thicket 
xxxxxx doing what i can xxx to shrink the belly... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx sings to it! xxx my summer kimono 
xxxxxx fourth month, second morning xxx i put on xxx the summer kimono 
xxxxxx grateful xxx for the summer kimono xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx soft-blowing grasses xxx and soft, soft xxx green bamboo blind 
xxxxxx green yesterday xxx in the blowing wind... xxx bamboo blind 
xxxxxx empty boat, xxx three herons guard xxx the mosquito net 
xxxxxx o owl xxx don't tell the world my house xxx has no mosquito net! 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx on the tip of my fan xxx mount asama 
xxxxxx smoke from the mountain, xxx my paper fan xxx speeds it along 
xxxxxx pretty, xxx beyond the smudge pot smoke xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx rushing into xxx the smudge pot smoke... xxx evening crow 
xxxxxx in grasses' shade xxx where soon i'll enter... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx back gate, xxx under the big nettle tree xxx nobody cooling off 
xxxxxx the empty purse xxx floats away... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx tea smoke, xxx buddha's little rice field xxx is planted too 
xxxxxx following behind xxx the hunter with his bow... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx three feet xxx from the musket's barrel... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx like it's throwing a party xxx for the bats... xxx grove of new bamboo 
xxxxxx gobble up xxx my dawn dream... xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx morning after morning, xxx what day is it now xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx he's not the type xxx to wait around... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx ten cloudy days, xxx this is getting old xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx about ten days xxx the clouds have grown old xxx my dear cuckoo 
xxxxxx it's new year's xxx for the blooming pinks... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx wake up, pinks xxx and plume grass... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx you too xxx should grow old... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx he even scolds xxx the tree planter 
xxxxxx hey cuckoo, xxx this lake doesn't xxx belong to me! 
xxxxxx in all musashi plain xxx just one... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx useless me xxx useless weeds... xxx the cuckoo's opinion 
xxxxxx he's hated xxx by the young folk... xxx the dear cuckoo 
xxxxxx i've waited long xxx for thee xxx o cuckoo! 
xxxxxx come what may xxx praise buddha! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx cheered on xxx by a reed thrush xxx the incompetent thief 
xxxxxx a flower big xxx as an umbrella-hat... xxx flitting firefly 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow, xxx though there's nagging xxx a firefly guest 
xxxxxx so quickly they join xxx the human goblins... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx the owl xxx seems to be hooting xxx for fireflies 
xxxxxx shunning xxx the mountain hermit... xxx flitting fireflies 
xxxxxx they shun xxx the priest... xxx flitting fireflies 
xxxxxx though a poor-soiled xxx province... xxx such fireflies! 
xxxxxx who said xxx this is a barren land? xxx what fireflies! 
xxxxxx in old age xxx mosquito-burning xxx the only great feat 
xxxxxx the bell clangs xxx "come to mosquito country! xxx come! come!" 
xxxxxx swarm of mosquitoes, xxx a five foot tall xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx mountain hermit, xxx deep in his sleeve xxx singing, a cicada 
xxxxxx morning rain, xxx look! next to me xxx a snail 
xxxxxx just as you are xxx become buddha! xxx snail 
xxxxxx the potted bamboo xxx rustles, rustles... xxx bonito! 
xxxxxx simply trust xxx mountain cuckoo! xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx the tofu vendor comes, xxx the day flower xxx blooms 
xxxxxx just being alive xxx i xxx and the poppy 
xxxxxx a vast wheat field xxx dotted with blooming xxx peonies 
xxxxxx floating leaves, floating leaves xxx lotus blossom horseflies xxx feed 
xxxxxx after biting the horse xxx the horsefly hides out... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx lotuses at their peak xxx horseflies and mosquitoes xxx feast 
xxxxxx from today on xxx hear my "praise buddha!" xxx lilies 
xxxxxx amid blooming lilies xxx many, many prayers xxx to amida buddha 
xxxxxx quietly the lilies xxx have bloomed... xxx a skylark sings 
xxxxxx sleeping cow, xxx at one with the heart xxx of lilies 
xxxxxx lilies blooming xxx with no one's sanction... xxx evening 
xxxxxx lilies blooming! xxx giving his all to his song xxx the skylark 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx in a floating world nook xxx ripened barley 
xxxxxx blooming in a nook xxx of ripened barley... xxx what's that flower? 
xxxxxx with all your might xxx wiggle young bamboo xxx while you can! 
xxxxxx wiggle wiggle xxx wiggle young bamboo xxx while you can! 
xxxxxx young bamboo, xxx just two or three days xxx of youth 
xxxxxx for bamboo shoots xxx a dark night xxx for bamboo shoots 
xxxxxx living apart xxx from the bamboo shoots... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx big brothers, little brothers xxx growing up 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx scraggly yellow roses, too xxx grew overnight 
xxxxxx night after night xxx the gate's bamboo shoots xxx rise in the world 
xxxxxx morning and night xxx yet still not smoldered... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx mulberry tree, xxx tomorrow, tomorrow xxx your new leaves 
xxxxxx deep tree shade, xxx some bush clover-like grass xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx hard tofu, xxx amid deutzia blossoms xxx a farmhouse 
xxxxxx the closer i get xxx to my village, the more pain... xxx wild roses 
xxxxxx little post, xxx on a cold night xxx my good luck god 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx lord buddha xxx in the cold night 
xxxxxx red-laced straw sandals xxx pass by too... xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx red-laced straw sandals xxx pass by too... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx bickering in the long night xxx in a nook xxx of sumida river 
xxxxxx to my rib cage ribs xxx o the night xxx is long! 
xxxxxx autumn's end, xxx a big man strolls xxx along 
xxxxxx autumn ends, xxx already the buddha xxx fills kyoto's sky 
xxxxxx trying and trying xxx to grasp the harvest moon, xxx toddler 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx tonight even you xxx are busy! 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx drifts with the tide... xxx a little boat 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx like demons emerging xxx autumn clouds 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx a little sumo wrestler xxx passes 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx he was good-looking too xxx in olden times 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx landing on my belly xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx blades of grass, xxx lost among the raindrops xxx autumn dew 
xxxxxx in the silver dewdrops xxx vanishing... xxx my house 
xxxxxx grateful xxx for the cool, cool air... xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx the sparrow sings xxx of next-life enlightenment 
xxxxxx amid dewdrops xxx of this dewdrop world xxx a quarrel 
xxxxxx amid weeping dewdrops xxx pigeons coo xxx "praise buddha!" 
xxxxxx even viewing dewdrops xxx an occasion for sake... xxx this year 
xxxxxx a treasure at my gate xxx pearls xxx of dew 
xxxxxx bell for the ancestors, xxx in falling dewdrops xxx it rings 
xxxxxx my ancestors, xxx today too they wander xxx to points unknown 
xxxxxx delighted by bonfires xxx for the dead... xxx children 
xxxxxx in the grassy meadow xxx flickering red... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx a clumsy festival! xxx my love wrecks her chopsticks xxx of plume grass 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx make the fence bloom... xxx sumo wrestling 
xxxxxx sumo wrestler, xxx for you this maiden xxx flower 
xxxxxx a scarecrow stands, xxx now the age xxx of moonlit nights! 
xxxxxx where did this cold xxx come from... xxx mr. scarecrow? 
xxxxxx flute melody, xxx thanking the mountain xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx a cowherd's flute xxx and evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx watches with one eye... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx singing with xxx the young pine nearby... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx one pink xxx has bloomed... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx home village, xxx pounding cloth at the temple xxx and evening rain 
xxxxxx home village, xxx mother's cloth-pounding xxx faintly heard 
xxxxxx old pine, xxx my own life's autumn xxx is like that 
xxxxxx old pine, xxx my own life's autumn xxx fills my eyes 
xxxxxx back door, xxx three spears of plume grass xxx and mr. and mrs. goose 
xxxxxx big bridge, xxx the hunter is followed xxx by a goose 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx wild geese, smoke xxx and my bended knees 
xxxxxx the moon's out! xxx in the gate's rice field xxx polite geese 
xxxxxx the red dragonfly xxx savors the evening too... xxx doesn't he? 
xxxxxx evening tide, xxx on the grass blade's tip xxx a red dragonfly 
xxxxxx crickets sing xxx "cricky! cricky!" xxx two young lovers 
xxxxxx making love xxx in the withered fields... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx night in the hut, xxx a katydid forages xxx for food 
xxxxxx a katydid walking xxx searching... xxx my hut's shelf 
xxxxxx trampling the god's xxx rice cake and jam... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx stomping and singing xxx on rice cake and jelly... xxx katydid! 
xxxxxx at evening tide xxx clinging to flotsam... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx wildflowers, xxx all we say or speak about xxx is autumn wind 
xxxxxx when the owl hoots xxx how many are left? xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx singed by a bolt xxx of lightning... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx you can't beat me xxx in tottering! xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx the rice blossoms of a man xxx with parents 
xxxxxx tea smoke, xxx the upland rice xxx trusts in the dew 
xxxxxx a great thing xxx under the harvest moon... xxx rice blossoms! 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx the fantastically great xxx rice blossoms! 
xxxxxx the young face xxx of the sickle moon... xxx a paulownia leaf falls 
xxxxxx looking at persimmons, xxx someone's parents xxx planted seeds 
xxxxxx tenth month xxx on the tenth day... xxx hail 
xxxxxx first winter month, xxx dimly in the mist xxx selling temple cotton 
xxxxxx the year ending, xxx one bundle of firewood xxx a luxury 
xxxxxx straw fire, xxx this year goes up xxx in smoke 
xxxxxx the nightingale follows xxx his mother... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx without fail xxx the bathhouse, closed... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx first winter rain, xxx the world fills up xxx with haiku 
xxxxxx in winter rain xxx how they scowl... xxx the buddhas 
xxxxxx enduring the winter rain xxx for whom? xxx stone buddha 
xxxxxx on my sleeping mat xxx the winter rain suddenly xxx gives off light! 
xxxxxx wrapping dinner xxx in butterbur leaves... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx tripping over the dog xxx again... xxx night of winter rain 
xxxxxx in the mountain village xxx the clonk of a hammer... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx the winter wind has strewn about xxx the vegetables 
xxxxxx in the winter wind xxx a great thing, the great xxx moon! 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx my forehead throbs... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx becomes a nuisance... xxx evening 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx the worms in my belly xxx sing 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx early morning at my gate xxx a beggar 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx for a dog-less village xxx the garbage remover 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx a big deal for people xxx in the world 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx the rooster's morning crow xxx at senso temple 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx from buddha's direction xxx pure water gushes 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx the temple walkway xxx misty dim 
xxxxxx "first snowfall, snowfall!" xxx he says xxx without teeth 
xxxxxx watching first snowfall xxx in a rotten mood... xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx hailstones, xxx even the gargoyle demon xxx seems to cry 
xxxxxx hailstones falling, xxx the pigeons hear xxx their fate 
xxxxxx hailstones falling... xxx as if telling xxx the pigeons' ill-fate 
xxxxxx into the mouth singing xxx "come, hailstones!" xxx a hailstone 
xxxxxx today even the pigeon xxx says a prayer... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx click-clack xxx in a soot-sweeping mist... xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx sea gull, xxx even you xxx covered in soot 
xxxxxx a toy bird, xxx even it xxx covered in soot 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers xxx look! over there! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx not crossing xxx kamo river twice! xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx on winter's first day xxx big toes emerge... xxx toe socks 
xxxxxx the cricket's xxx winter residence... xxx my quilt 
xxxxxx staying glued xxx to the banked fire... xxx a priest 
xxxxxx eyeing the rice cake xxx on the banked fire... xxx crow 
xxxxxx tossing 'em on xxx the banked fire... xxx stolen chestnuts 
xxxxxx rapping on xxx the banked fire's head... xxx my pipe 
xxxxxx banked fire, xxx with my pipe rapping xxx its head 
xxxxxx banked fire, xxx with my pipe rapping xxx its head 
xxxxxx rapping on xxx the banked fire's head... xxx my pipe 
xxxxxx banked fire, xxx hot water burbles too xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx frozen pickle water, xxx my teeth xxx crackle 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx just a half portion... xxx natto 
xxxxxx natto, xxx for a full portion xxx traveling far 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx for a bellyful of natto xxx a trip to kyoto 
xxxxxx at dawn red leaves xxx blowing down... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx the mountain's red leaves xxx blowing down... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx o owl, xxx let me shop for food xxx first! 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx with a shrill voice xxx calling mother 
xxxxxx birdsong in bamboo grass, xxx too shy xxx for the fence 
xxxxxx evening plovers, xxx bills are due xxx people are crying 
xxxxxx you call that xxx your morning mood? xxx river plover 
xxxxxx even flying xxx into my sleeve... xxx a plover 
xxxxxx if they were people xxx they'd be buddhas! xxx sea slugs 
xxxxxx following custom xxx all have withered... xxx wild chamomile 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx a heron guards the radish xxx in the mud 
xxxxxx leaves falling, xxx a prayer-chanting monk xxx passes by 
xxxxxx forming a mountain xxx for the nightingale... xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx "no begging allowed" xxx at the thicket's inn 
xxxxxx a typical new year's day xxx spent viewing xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx spring's first month xxx in the town... xxx snow falling 
xxxxxx first month, xxx such a night xxx of bright moon! 
xxxxxx first month, xxx on the servant no sign xxx of a beard 
xxxxxx this morning xxx just a tiny bit of mist... xxx it's springtime! 
xxxxxx my spring xxx is lucky, lucky! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx spring's begun, xxx i even dream about xxx the grove of young pines 
xxxxxx hole in the wall xxx pretty xxx my year's first sky 
xxxxxx to the year's first sky xxx the lion-puppet xxx rears his head 
xxxxxx it's forming xxx the new year's sky... xxx smoke 
xxxxxx so that the year's xxx first sky might come to be... xxx tea smoke 
xxxxxx the color of the year's xxx first sky fades, xxx people's faces 
xxxxxx village at the edge xxx of the year's first sky... xxx must be cold 
xxxxxx under the brilliance xxx of the year's first sky... xxx a hut 
xxxxxx rising into xxx the year's first sky... xxx smoke 
xxxxxx year's first sky, xxx please allow xxx my tea smoke! 
xxxxxx year first sky, xxx hesitantly it rises xxx tea smoke 
xxxxxx year's first sky, xxx at the edges its color xxx is faded 
xxxxxx to the eternal xxx youth ornament the child xxx prays 
xxxxxx day breaks xxx over the eternal youth ornament... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx from under the eternal xxx youth ornament rising... xxx sun 
xxxxxx my eternal youth ornament, xxx just three cents xxx of emperor's pine 
xxxxxx my dream comes true, xxx this spring my god xxx the god of the poor 
xxxxxx a trendy kite soars, xxx below xxx a beggar's hut 
xxxxxx a trendy kite soars xxx over the mountain xxx home 
xxxxxx the street singer's xxx kite also... xxx rising and rising 
xxxxxx begging actors, xxx even the horse's rump xxx gets a song 
xxxxxx begging actors at the gate, xxx pigeons and sparrows xxx in a row 
xxxxxx begging actors, xxx even the wheat field xxx gets a song 
xxxxxx the lion puppet xxx opens wide... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx not shutting up xxx new year morning's late riser... xxx the crow 
xxxxxx second month, xxx the heavenly gods' xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx moon shining xxx on a one-penny bridge... xxx springtime 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx smash goes the sake bottle xxx on mount matchi 
xxxxxx a pigeon coos, xxx "that great thing, spring xxx has passed!" 
xxxxxx swish-swish xxx spring is departing... xxx field of grass 
xxxxxx swish-swish xxx the grass waves goodbye xxx to spring 
xxxxxx zigzag-zigzag xxx goes the spring... xxx field grasses 
xxxxxx hey birds! xxx even if you shut up xxx spring would go 
xxxxxx warding off crows xxx in the radish field... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx in bush clover xxx a deer hides out... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx in the spring rain xxx a big yawn... xxx pretty woman 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx a little island too xxx blooms golden 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx here's my house's xxx evening pine 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx thatched with azaleas xxx the doghouse 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx in an old keg xxx a plum tree blooms 
xxxxxx someone recites xxx the lotus sutra... xxx spring rain falls 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx going down to the east xxx a sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a cow leads the way xxx to zenko temple 
xxxxxx oh peach xxx come float to me! xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx a death bell too xxx can be heard... xxx misty field 
xxxxxx in a flash xxx the mist is mended... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx a poor "praise buddha!" too xxx in spring mist 
xxxxxx the lake steams xxx like a hot bath... xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx lord dokan's xxx lookout mound 
xxxxxx today xxx my hut's little herbs too xxx become cakes 
xxxxxx my child, xxx today's low tide xxx little guide 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx even in a five-foot garden xxx low tide shell-gathering 
xxxxxx "praise amida! xxx praise amida!" xxx threshing tea leaves 
xxxxxx mixed in xxx with the second tea harvest xxx azaleas 
xxxxxx plowing the rice field, xxx the sky a paler and paler xxx blue 
xxxxxx plowing the field xxx wiping snot xxx on plum blossoms 
xxxxxx he grafts the branch xxx perfectly straight... xxx sacred shikimi 
xxxxxx blown by the red xxx horse's nose... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx children crowded 'round xxx wear her out... xxx mother sparrow 
xxxxxx rising to the blue sky xxx baby sparrow's xxx first cry 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx a stepchild sparrow xxx cries in the pine 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx wipes his feet... xxx on plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx makes a face in the smoke... xxx fence sitting 
xxxxxx a nightingale xxx is singing... xxx in the kettle 
xxxxxx listening to the nightingale's xxx lotus sutra... xxx shinano 
xxxxxx a nightingale, xxx and made to order xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in deep mountains too xxx now the nightingale xxx sings! 
xxxxxx drinking country sake, xxx a country nightingale xxx singing 
xxxxxx on the hoe's handle xxx a nightingale sings... xxx little-plum village 
xxxxxx even the nightingale xxx of shinano sings it... xxx lotus sutra 
xxxxxx sickle moon, xxx through plum blossoms softly xxx the nightingale 
xxxxxx daybreak, xxx a nightingale sings xxx a bell rings 
xxxxxx at a little shrine xxx dragging his tail... xxx evening pheasant 
xxxxxx poking his head xxx out the little shrine xxx crying pheasant 
xxxxxx in cogon grass xxx croaking while walking... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx bathing in cherry blossoms xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx frogs at my hut xxx from the beginning have sung xxx "we grow old!" 
xxxxxx butterflies flit, xxx deep in shinano xxx tracks of sandals 
xxxxxx such sweet harmony xxx to be reborn xxx a meadow butterfly! 
xxxxxx my feet for a pillow xxx and my hands... xxx the friendly deer 
xxxxxx this world, xxx the butterfly also toils xxx busily 
xxxxxx though infested with lice xxx blossom viewing... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx the holy man's xxx westward waves of wisteria xxx rustling 
xxxxxx the holy man's xxx westward waves of wisteria xxx fresh-bloomed 
xxxxxx black kite, xxx the rice cake dealer's wisteria xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx for the nightingale xxx parents and children... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx a new year begins xxx on moutn tsukuba 
xxxxxx at the edge xxx of the big sky... xxx plum blossom farmhouse 
xxxxxx the antelope's xxx mouth opens wide... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx making dumplings xxx from black mud... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx black mud, xxx stuck to my straw sandals, too xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the rice husker sits xxx on his rice cake tub... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx for every three feet xxx of mountain's foot... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx on the offering stand xxx five or six pennies... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx cloth monkeys xxx three in all... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx a dog stands guard xxx over plum blossoms 
xxxxxx from plum blossoms xxx he calls to the peddlar... xxx country villa 
xxxxxx plum tree blooming, xxx a plain and to-the-point xxx little house 
xxxxxx the teahouse xxx is roofed with shells... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx amid cherry blossoms xxx the smell of smoke... xxx pipes 
xxxxxx saint nyoirin xxx in cherry blossom shade xxx sleep talking 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx with the founder's blessing xxx eating fish 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx with the founder's blessing xxx cats make love 
xxxxxx spring blossoms, xxx in the cherry grove xxx a worldly priest 
xxxxxx in blossoming trees xxx suddenly he's hidden... xxx my son 
xxxxxx on cherry blossom day xxx fasting too... xxx wild dog 
xxxxxx someone has slapped on xxx a price tag... xxx cherry tree 
xxxxxx no buyers at all xxx for the big xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the big cherry blossoms, xxx no buyers xxx at all 
xxxxxx someone has slapped on xxx a price tag... xxx cherry tree 
xxxxxx click-clack xxx go the wooden clogs... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx even while walking xxx through cherry blossoms... xxx nagging! 
xxxxxx born poor xxx viewing them even at night... xxx cherry-blossoms 
xxxxxx a rear sitting room xxx no one enters... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx flower guard xxx at night they're yours... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the baby at her breast xxx wants to eat... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the roof sweeper xxx stands still... xxx evening cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx soon as the mountain xxx cherry trees bloom... xxx buddhist whatnots are attached 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx for you too xxx an end-of-month sky 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx over you too xxx an end-of-month sky 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx over you too xxx an end-of-month sky 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms, xxx for you too xxx an end-of-month sky 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms, xxx the ants also xxx have a place to sleep 
xxxxxx the whole gang xxx forced to merriment... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx barley and all xxx fattening nicely... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx my mean peach tree xxx nice and chubby xxx with blossoms 
xxxxxx a yellow rose xxx offered as a gift... xxx by the fence 
xxxxxx the geese and ducks xxx are brazen... xxx willow at the gate 
xxxxxx keeping their cool, xxx the wild goose xxx the willow 
xxxxxx one strand dangles xxx toward shimosa... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx with each willow tree xxx he plants xxx "praise buddha!" 
xxxxxx the ducks have gone, xxx peace and quiet xxx of the willow 
xxxxxx on a short summer night xxx setting on the mountain pass... xxx moon 
xxxxxx cool breeze xxx you, too, surrender to buddha xxx this life! 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx reaching even nooks xxx the mouse doesn't know! 
xxxxxx on the cool air xxx one blade of grass also xxx relies 
xxxxxx in summer cool xxx ambling down my road xxx to hell 
xxxxxx cool evening, xxx at my gate the age xxx of buddha 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx admiring the pine xxx the shrine's snake 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx the shape of the cloud xxx is buddha 
xxxxxx the cicadas' world xxx and my world of cool air... xxx coming soon 
xxxxxx trusting the cloudburst xxx to water it... xxx back door fuji 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx plume grass, rushes, xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a crossroads beggar xxx with a potted pine 
xxxxxx i swear xxx i see a demon... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx i'd like that little one xxx for my gate... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx the little ones xxx are all to the front... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx a good wind! xxx in it, a tiny xxx mountain of cloud 
xxxxxx my humble hut, xxx trusting in the sun xxx rice field greening 
xxxxxx buddha, xxx all the way to hokkaido xxx your birthday party! 
xxxxxx the swallows too xxx pray for the town... xxx river shrine 
xxxxxx trying to yank xxx the thatch of irises for its nest... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx the young folk xxx lick the iris leaves... xxx bath time 
xxxxxx the toddler's head fresh-shaved xxx his summer kimono xxx pretty 
xxxxxx umbrella-hats xxx sun hats... xxx trust in buddha! 
xxxxxx fifty, sixty feet away, xxx the willow xxx the parasols 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx the cat seeks shelter xxx in the mosquito net 
xxxxxx a white fan, xxx "who gave it to you?" xxx they ask 
xxxxxx cooling at the gate, xxx the old man's swallows xxx behaving 
xxxxxx even mr. moon xxx is slandered! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx even the moon xxx is slandered... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx rice planting, xxx today too, traveling geese xxx flutter down 
xxxxxx asakusa, xxx the cuckoo stays close by xxx in ueno 
xxxxxx asakura, xxx introducing himself in passing xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx announce yourself xxx to lord pine... xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx outcaste village, xxx instead of a cuckoo xxx a mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx is the night this nice xxx in china? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx oh cuckoo xxx you also hate kyoto xxx don't you? 
xxxxxx a cuckoo, xxx the bridge beggar xxx listens too 
xxxxxx are you a fool, too xxx nightingale? xxx singing no more 
xxxxxx scattered by xxx kumasaka's halberd... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx they have kids too, xxx bridge beggars xxx calling fireflies 
xxxxxx a night of fireflies xxx has arrived... xxx my spring-planted willow 
xxxxxx planting a willow xxx will become nights xxx of fireflies 
xxxxxx the mouth that xxx praised amida buddha xxx calling fireflies 
xxxxxx don't turn into xxx a thorn bush! xxx flitting firefly 
xxxxxx the closer i get xxx to my village, the more pain... xxx wild roses 
xxxxxx hut's mosquitoes xxx this damned year, too xxx feasting 
xxxxxx evening sky, xxx the whine of mosquitoes xxx pretty 
xxxxxx in a sake cup xxx a flea xxx swimming! swimming! 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx begging i borrow xxx a flea-infested mat 
xxxxxx borrowing the hut xxx from fleas and mosquitoes xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx raising their chirr xxx on their last day... xxx summer cicadas 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr xxx herons stand at attention... xxx temple sitting room 
xxxxxx in a dewdrop world xxx singing of dewdrops... xxx summer cicada 
xxxxxx in a sumiyoshi nook xxx here too xxx blooming irises 
xxxxxx bancho town, xxx deep in the valley xxx melon blossoms 
xxxxxx evening shadows, xxx a pigeon watches xxx the melon cool 
xxxxxx a blizzard xxx of deutzia blossoms xxx on the fence 
xxxxxx behind me, xxx big cold, little cold xxx night cold 
xxxxxx just looking at the shark skin xxx of a cactus... xxx the night turns cold 
xxxxxx brazenly xxx the mouse sneaks in... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx on an island in a rice field, too xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx every little island xxx in its own way... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx quite remarkable xxx being born human... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx little pine islands xxx fist after fist... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx this is yoshiwara xxx and yet... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx wind in the window's little hole xxx plays flute 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx the hole in the paper door xxx blows flute 
xxxxxx delightful, the view xxx from the gate in the long night... xxx all four directions 
xxxxxx autumn departs xxx trailing the pickled radish xxx vendor 
xxxxxx which of you owns xxx that red moon xxx children? 
xxxxxx granny walks along xxx drinking sake... xxx a moonlit night 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx from my gate then up xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx just a tip remains xxx of the harvest moon... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx at the divine knees xxx of kannon 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx sumida river thick xxx with mosquitoes 
xxxxxx the calf begins xxx his journey... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx graffiti on a wall xxx the monk hemamushiyo 
xxxxxx autumn wind xxx stripping the birch tree's xxx bark 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the face of the man xxx planting pines 
xxxxxx the calf begins xxx his journey... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx just looking at the shark skin xxx of a cactus... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx dazzling moon xxx over the autumn gale... xxx nice and hot 
xxxxxx the toasty warm moon xxx dazzling bright xxx over the autumn gale 
xxxxxx blowing two people xxx after their fleas... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx dew at the gate, xxx the sparrow licks it xxx clean 
xxxxxx heron on a post xxx gazing down, it seems xxx at dewdrops 
xxxxxx into the silver dew xxx splashing struts xxx the crow 
xxxxxx my humble hut, xxx washing arms and legs xxx in dewy grass 
xxxxxx my arms and legs xxx thin as nails... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the thin mist xxx in a tangle... xxx hedgerow 
xxxxxx bonfires for the dead xxx sputter and die... xxx a flood of memories 
xxxxxx the man in the tree xxx can't be blamed... xxx outdoor sumo match 
xxxxxx the owl sleeps xxx nevertheless... xxx sumo wrestling 
xxxxxx not grasping xxx the autumn evening... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx the owl high above xxx laughs to the beat... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx on his antler again xxx the cicada sings 
xxxxxx hesitating xxx at my hut xxx the stray deer 
xxxxxx little eaves, xxx "it's smoky! smoky!" xxx sings the quail 
xxxxxx geese at my gate xxx cry all you like... xxx no rice 
xxxxxx stretching her neck xxx the goose peeks in xxx my gate 
xxxxxx rice field geese, xxx the village's population xxx surges 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese xxx crapping on people xxx fly on 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese xxx hitting the mark... xxx field by my hut 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx plume grass beckons xxx people chase 
xxxxxx mr. long-beard's coming xxx hush up! xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx where did you xxx leave your parents? xxx rice field goose 
xxxxxx the cricket moves xxx to a new post... xxx on the post 
xxxxxx crying and crying xxx at kisa lagoon... xxx the katydid 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx breaks out into song... xxx on the deer's antler 
xxxxxx like one long ago, xxx the katydid rips xxx its paper cage 
xxxxxx stone buddha, xxx who gave you wildflowers xxx to hold? 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx praise the twentieth-day moon xxx wildflowers! 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx growing in a mosquito net xxx a chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx a chrysanthemum blooms, xxx just like me xxx a would-be hermit 
xxxxxx the dragonfly xxx takes a crap... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx my hut xxx with its morning-glories xxx a palace 
xxxxxx on the month's first day xxx last day, no vacation? xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx graveyard, xxx all alone a maiden flower xxx twisting 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx silently bows... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx the stray cat also xxx picks this inn... xxx bush clover blooming 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx an old-style cat xxx and bush clover 
xxxxxx green rice field, xxx razed to the ground xxx still blooming 
xxxxxx waving in xxx a fruitful year... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx staring at the man xxx burning leaves... xxx stone buddha 
xxxxxx have you forgotten xxx blooming season's over? xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx surviving xxx and surviving... xxx how cold it is! 
xxxxxx all according to plan, yet xxx i'm cold! xxx poor! 
xxxxxx this world xxx is a dewdrop world xxx yes... but... 
xxxxxx in darkness xxx even on the tatami mat... xxx ice 
xxxxxx children, xxx edo's ice tastes sweet xxx i bet! 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx from which hole xxx will spring come? 
xxxxxx geese and ducks xxx sing! sing! xxx stop the year from ending 
xxxxxx like he's biting xxx the cold moon... xxx gargoyle 
xxxxxx green brushwood xxx weighed in the scales... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx "why's this winter xxx rain so late?" xxx the crow caws 
xxxxxx its name tag blowing xxx in the winter rain... xxx bag of rice 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx a churning, churning xxx in my belly 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx and there's the buddha's xxx two-day moon 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx the worms in my gut xxx raise a ruckus 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx the outhouse attendant's xxx little lantern 
xxxxxx frost has formed, xxx i see whiteness xxx in my nostrils! 
xxxxxx frost on the graves, xxx the pilgrim geese above xxx honking 
xxxxxx the bill collector xxx with shoes on steps inside xxx to the hearth 
xxxxxx stowing the good luck xxx of roasted beans... xxx in my heart 
xxxxxx a year older xxx sparrows in the bamboo... xxx warm-hearted 
xxxxxx wood fire, xxx my white hair's luster xxx gets a compliment 
xxxxxx eyeing the potato xxx on the banked fire... xxx crow 
xxxxxx on musashi plain xxx who are they? xxx eating pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx "shameful, that piss-pot!" xxx the flock of plovers xxx sing 
xxxxxx even in the tub xxx where reeds are burning... xxx a plover! 
xxxxxx on friendly terms xxx with the dog of iosaki... xxx a plover 
xxxxxx on holy jizo's lap! xxx in his sleeves! xxx plovers singing 
xxxxxx plovers singing, xxx "it's the last day xxx of ninth month!" 
xxxxxx a plover sings, xxx with a rice bag on his head xxx he passes 
xxxxxx the winter fly xxx i spare, the cat xxx snatches 
xxxxxx on people xxx and on pufferfish xxx the same moon shines 
xxxxxx squirming xxx through the blossoms... xxx people 
xxxxxx beggars under a bridge xxx give it a toss... xxx pufferfish 
xxxxxx presenting itself xxx to musashi plain... xxx the pufferfish 
xxxxxx wrap it in straw xxx or it'll show... xxx face of the pufferfish 
xxxxxx wrapped in straw, xxx of course! a pufferfish xxx and plum blossoms 
xxxxxx winter trees, xxx an old sound xxx from olden times 
xxxxxx let the fleeing people xxx alone! xxx red leaves falling 
xxxxxx up to today xxx still no decision to scatter? xxx out-of-season blooms 
xxxxxx moon! blossoms! xxx forty-nine years walking around xxx a waste 
xxxxxx "moon" and "blossoms" xxx empty babble xxx of a floating world 
xxxxxx even for the tongue-tied xxx crow of the east... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx the baby given chopsticks xxx digs in... xxx spring's first morning 
xxxxxx well, well... xxx now i've seen fifty xxx blossoming springs 
xxxxxx amazing to reach xxx my fiftieth year... xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx no reed mat over my head xxx fifty years now 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx at least i'm human xxx fifty years now 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx at least i'm human xxx fifty years now 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx no reed mat over my head xxx fifty years now 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx the future buddha in ten more xxx years of the dragon 
xxxxxx creating a pretty xxx spring... xxx the evening rain 
xxxxxx to the same world xxx one after another... xxx temple coin souvenirs 
xxxxxx just a foot long xxx but it'll do... xxx new year's pine 
xxxxxx a crossroads sermon xxx gibberish xxx spring peace 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx in the great courtier's hem xxx dust 
xxxxxx all of a sudden xxx he shuts up... xxx crow 
xxxxxx in the long day xxx they eat, they don't eat xxx pond turtles 
xxxxxx the field crow xxx slips so cleverly... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx even the field mouse xxx squeaks, "what luck!" xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx in spring rain xxx with a paper lantern... xxx little beauty 
xxxxxx potted tree, xxx i blow a spring breeze on you xxx again today 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the pleasure quarter's xxx night life 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx over the game stones xxx ten at a time 
xxxxxx spring wind, xxx my thatched roof xxx blown flat 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx where my feet are pointed xxx i'm on my way 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx when did you come out xxx noon moon? 
xxxxxx long and narrow xxx the spring breeze blows... xxx gentle slope 
xxxxxx turtle shells xxx blown into a row... xxx east wind 
xxxxxx spring mist, xxx the place where money trees xxx are planted 
xxxxxx on a misty day xxx they chat... xxx horses in the field 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx no doubt heaven's saints xxx bored stiff 
xxxxxx an old temple bell xxx and voices too xxx muffled in mist 
xxxxxx the old bowl xxx quickly misted over... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx even the wheat xxx in a morning mood... xxx blue mist 
xxxxxx imitating me xxx the good-for-nothing mountain xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx old pine xxx starting a new year... xxx how many spring mists? 
xxxxxx out of mist xxx one by one they come... xxx kan-ei temple 
xxxxxx the night guest's lamp xxx in mist... xxx temple in a field 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx how the cat talks xxx in her sleep! 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx covering the rice... xxx crows 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx the lackey turns to look xxx behind him 
xxxxxx the little tavern xxx open for business... xxx spring mountain 
xxxxxx brushed by her sleeves xxx every mountain xxx is greening! 
xxxxxx the goddess of spring xxx missed a few spots... xxx mottled mountain 
xxxxxx herb cakes, xxx when did you get here xxx little butterfly? 
xxxxxx even tossing rice xxx is a sin... xxx sparring chickens 
xxxxxx blue skies xxx nothing but blue skies... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx picking herbs, xxx the fox's hole gets xxx a "hello!" 
xxxxxx the village child xxx picking herbs, reveals xxx a foxhole 
xxxxxx monkey on the monkey xxx watches... xxx the burning field 
xxxxxx planting one xxx pine sapling... xxx my grandchild's face 
xxxxxx snatched xxx by the spoonbill... xxx the grafted branch 
xxxxxx the mountain crow xxx laughs at the branch xxx i grafted 
xxxxxx mountain crow, xxx he sees my grafted tree xxx and laughs 
xxxxxx cats' love calls, xxx between them flows xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the edo cat xxx in a frenzy... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the edo cat xxx in a frenzy... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx cats' love calls, xxx between them flows xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx jumping so well xxx over the fire... xxx the love-crazed cat 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx just one house xxx one love-crazed cat 
xxxxxx parent sparrows xxx baby sparrows... xxx a happy mountain 
xxxxxx baby sparrow, xxx his face unaware xxx of his parents' fights 
xxxxxx are you the nightingale's xxx only daughter xxx behind the others, singing? 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx his face doesn't look xxx like a big shot's 
xxxxxx lining up xxx with newcomers' faces... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx at the little gambling shack xxx the swallow xxx prattles 
xxxxxx lovely, xxx the sky after a lark xxx has sung 
xxxxxx lovely, xxx the sky where a noon lark xxx is singing 
xxxxxx come down! come down! xxx brushfires have started... xxx singing lark 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx over in the bamboo xxx a lark sings 
xxxxxx missing people xxx by two or three feet... xxx skylarks 
xxxxxx seeing the inn's xxx inner garden, the lark xxx sings 
xxxxxx down a narrow alley xxx the ocean... xxx a singing lark 
xxxxxx the mountain man's xxx hoe is his pillow... xxx singing lark 
xxxxxx a pheasant xxx loitering about, peeks xxx in my gate 
xxxxxx crying pheasant, pounding mill xxx morning till noon xxx at the temple 
xxxxxx crying pheasant, xxx swallow the eight provinces xxx in a gulp! 
xxxxxx oh cuckoo, xxx swallow blossom-filled edo xxx in a gulp! 
xxxxxx the pheasant cries xxx as if catching sight xxx of a mountain 
xxxxxx a pheasant rushing xxx to the mountain, missing xxx his darling wife 
xxxxxx the green willow too xxx tires of watching... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx departing geese, xxx human beings miss them xxx terribly 
xxxxxx after the geese depart xxx back to normal... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx in the karasaki pine xxx jet black... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx in grassy shade xxx the frog's wife also lives xxx in seclusion 
xxxxxx get ready to see xxx my piss waterfall! xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx brazenly squatting xxx on the tatami mat... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx in every direction xxx ten thousand blessings... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx taking flight xxx and a leak... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx crossing the bridge xxx behind the blind man... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx paying a visit xxx to the flower's root... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx one foot xxx on the butterbur leaf... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx the yellow rose's xxx honorable ally... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the evening sky... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx next to evening's mount fuji xxx his butt... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx wake up! wake up! xxx sparrows, butterflies xxx are dancing 
xxxxxx don't be lazy! xxx sparrows, butterflies xxx are dancing 
xxxxxx making their living xxx butterfly couples... xxx three...five! 
xxxxxx the poop scooper xxx utterly smeared... xxx with butterflies 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx bodhidharma, butterfly xxx and sparrows 
xxxxxx clinging to xxx the boar hunter's arm... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx one came xxx and two left... xxx garden butterflies 
xxxxxx the butterfly xxx and the deer, best xxx of friends 
xxxxxx butterfly dances xxx 'round the arrow xxx in a dying deer 
xxxxxx three feet xxx from the musket's barrel... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx temple mountain, xxx a baby tumbles xxx a butterfly flits 
xxxxxx from dawn to dusk xxx the butterfly couple xxx makes their living 
xxxxxx a green lawn, xxx come have a seat xxx sir pond snail! 
xxxxxx little tub, xxx pond snails ready for shelling xxx play sliding games 
xxxxxx the fish xxx unaware of the bucket... xxx a cool evening 
xxxxxx making no fuss xxx they are captured... xxx pond snails 
xxxxxx pond snails sing xxx they're in the kettle xxx but don't know it 
xxxxxx sound asleep xxx there is peace on earth... xxx pond snail 
xxxxxx mokubo temple, xxx a blossom-viewing pond snail xxx and mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx a pretty thing xxx on the beggarly vine... xxx buds 
xxxxxx following the times xxx even my hut's grasses xxx so young! 
xxxxxx new grass, xxx at the town's back door xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx croaking frogs, xxx "rape flowers in the ditch xxx have bloomed!" 
xxxxxx in the flowering mustard xxx kazusa-style xxx "praise buddha!" 
xxxxxx in the flowering mustard xxx well, well xxx the great god inari! 
xxxxxx beyond the gate xxx of flowering mustard... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx at the edge xxx of the flowering mustard... xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx praise buddha! xxx my little side-field xxx has bloomed with rape 
xxxxxx flimsily xxx the beggar's mustard flowers too xxx have bloomed 
xxxxxx like they're calling xxx to the nightingale... xxx the bracken 
xxxxxx plum in bloom, xxx a beggar's blossoms too xxx next door 
xxxxxx on his scrap of mat xxx four or five mon... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in the box xxx four or five mon... xxx night of winter rain 
xxxxxx in the field xxx of the buddha of misfortune xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx though they bloomed xxx they're not much to look at... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in hell's mirror xxx the plum-blossom thief's xxx reflection 
xxxxxx brother, look! xxx sakubei's shop has xxx plums 
xxxxxx coins clattering xxx he thanks them politely... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx at the end of the money- xxx begging rope... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossoms too xxx must trust... xxx lowering the basket 
xxxxxx in the woods where xxx a wild boar was spotted... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx an uproar 'round xxx the penny toss hole... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx spreading as far xxx as hokkaido... xxx buddha's law and blossoms 
xxxxxx squirming xxx through the cherry blossoms... xxx people 
xxxxxx in scattering blossoms xxx buddha and buddhism xxx unknown 
xxxxxx scattering cherry blossoms, xxx thirsty for that faraway xxx mist 
xxxxxx year after year xxx the sin of blossoms... xxx wrinkled now 
xxxxxx bloom, cherry trees! xxx buddha's law spreads xxx to hokkaido 
xxxxxx in this world xxx over hell... xxx viewing spring blossoms 
xxxxxx stepchild cherry blossoms, xxx not stunted xxx at all 
xxxxxx where they dug up xxx the blooming cherry tree xxx the wind blows 
xxxxxx second day xxx at market, drying up... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx like they fell xxx from heaven... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the month's xxx mr. ten and mr. nine... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx he's a mountain xxx cherry blossom-crazed xxx old man 
xxxxxx as soon as it bloomed xxx they dug up xxx the cherry tree 
xxxxxx yellow roses, xxx a horse tied xxx to an old jizo 
xxxxxx dangling xxx in the yellow roses xxx the bull's balls 
xxxxxx sixth month, xxx the brutal heat xxx is no more 
xxxxxx over my head xxx a sixth month night xxx of moon 
xxxxxx summer's early dawn, xxx dwindling night reveals xxx a willow 
xxxxxx nighttime in edo xxx is especially short... xxx it seems 
xxxxxx nights growing shorter xxx a delight... xxx sweet nostalgia 
xxxxxx all the short summer night xxx hard at work puffing... xxx mount asama 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx little puff-ball flowers xxx have bloomed 
xxxxxx "the summer night xxx so brief, so brief!" xxx people and blossoms agree 
xxxxxx a hot day's treasure xxx they say, little clump xxx of trees 
xxxxxx the beards of millet xxx in good health... xxx such heat! 
xxxxxx herons in a row, xxx everywhere the same xxx cool breeze 
xxxxxx trailing behind xxx the cool air... xxx the month's last day 
xxxxxx summer cool, xxx the puffy clouds xxx like handballs 
xxxxxx when evening falls xxx the willows of edo xxx chill 
xxxxxx old age, xxx even the cool moon xxx soon grows tiresome 
xxxxxx a crab pinches xxx the leaf of a reed, xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx sakamoto, xxx thatched huts, thatched huts xxx and fifth month rain 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx not a rock xxx without azaleas 
xxxxxx mr. toad, xxx the fifth month rains xxx have begun! 
xxxxxx the bagworm xxx has strong karma... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx just three raindrops xxx and they call it xxx "a stormy night!" 
xxxxxx just three raindrops xxx "a stormy night! xxx a stormy night!" 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx at the edge of the sea xxx it starts 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx a crane-tortoise-pine-bamboo xxx attitude 
xxxxxx touching the head xxx of the raining cloud... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx the cloudburst's xxx target... xxx teahouse in a field 
xxxxxx the cloudburst's xxx answer to sunlight... xxx a night sky 
xxxxxx like he's snapping xxx at the downpour... xxx gargoyle 
xxxxxx standing in the cloudburst xxx keeping her cool... xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a poor sake bottle xxx rolls along 
xxxxxx the cloud mountain xxx behind one blade of grass xxx vanishes 
xxxxxx the peaks of clouds xxx hiding xxx in the grass 
xxxxxx festival day, xxx even the little clouds xxx forming peaks 
xxxxxx don't run away xxx from the sickle moon xxx billowing clouds! 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx the flea also heads xxx for the peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx kisa lagoon, xxx a summer moon worthy xxx of noin 
xxxxxx the goddess of spring's xxx child, come out too! xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx crossing the river xxx taking a leak... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx the hairy bug xxx becomes a butterfly... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx the door opens xxx to naniwa bay... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx summer moon, xxx there's no such thing xxx as a flawless night 
xxxxxx guarded by the goddess xxx kannon... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx pure water over moss, xxx come, pigeons! xxx come, sparrows! 
xxxxxx praise buddha's xxx compassionate saints! xxx pure water 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even behind the outhouse xxx pure water gushes 
xxxxxx come nightfall xxx it still gushes diligently... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx in the cogon grass xxx it rustles again... xxx rice dumpling wrapper 
xxxxxx rustle-rustle xxx nibbling on a rice dumpling... xxx a pretty woman 
xxxxxx clamorous cormorants xxx see in the new year xxx too 
xxxxxx granny's cormorant too xxx celebrates the third day xxx of first month 
xxxxxx for the geese and ducks xxx of this world... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx even no-good me xxx somehow pulls it off... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx the morning willow xxx is first... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx chanting "praise buddha!" xxx changing into xxx my summer robe 
xxxxxx in the beggar's town, too xxx in thicket shade xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx through my summer kimono shining xxx moon in the pine 
xxxxxx a catfish caught xxx in a gourd... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx like blue sky xxx the summer kimono xxx i'm wearing 
xxxxxx a kimono for a sail xxx rushing along... xxx little boat 
xxxxxx printed small xxx on the summer kimono xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx like a felled tree xxx in his summer kimono... xxx big man 
xxxxxx summer kimonos, too xxx cut to show shins... xxx festival 
xxxxxx in the deep heart xxx of the tall bamboo... xxx an afternoon mosquito net 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx from inside my mosquito net xxx i watch 
xxxxxx wildflowers xxx at full bloom... xxx her paper fan 
xxxxxx shading my eyes xxx with saigyo's mount fuji... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx a gift xxx from the god of the poor... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx behind my back xxx fingers rolling prayer beads... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx the horse's bell xxx the insects' weaving... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx nights in edo xxx today and tomorrow... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx on a deserted mountain xxx pinching fleas... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a beggar offers xxx his services... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a soot-grimed amida buddha xxx at my side... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx the holy hermit xxx puts on a kimono... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx live long! xxx in your ceremonial robe xxx enjoy the evening cool 
xxxxxx life in town, xxx while enjoying the cool air xxx "praise buddha!" 
xxxxxx the moon departs, xxx in kyoto even she enjoys xxx the cool breeze 
xxxxxx night after night, xxx even the beggarly vine xxx enjoys the cool air 
xxxxxx hey nightingale xxx what blooms at the icehouses xxx of edo? 
xxxxxx in my palm xxx next to one of my lice... xxx ice 
xxxxxx a day to celebrate xxx snow country's snow! xxx a pale blue sky 
xxxxxx following behind the fawn xxx a crow xxx of nara 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx blossoming fourth month's xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx edo's new arrival... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx always around now xxx from the palace... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx entering edo xxx the first voice i hear xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx oyodo town, xxx leave in silence xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx worthy of sir cuckoo, xxx the moon xxx in the pine 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx escaping the palace xxx at night 
xxxxxx always around now xxx from the palace... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx if you don't like the bamboo xxx stay in the tree! 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx azalea clotted fields! xxx mountains! 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx azaleas adorn xxx my umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx oh cuckoo, xxx swallow blossom-filled edo xxx in a gulp! 
xxxxxx crying pheasant xxx swallow the eight provinces xxx in a gulp! 
xxxxxx a good match, xxx the sickle moon xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't let muen temple's xxx prayers drown you out... xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx mountain country, xxx why do you dislike it xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx the boat departs, xxx right next to his head xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx to our ears xxx just a lot of noise... xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx a mountain cuckoo sings xxx "don't fall off xxx that horse!" 
xxxxxx looking down at the village xxx of white walls xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx just one reed xxx for the reed thrush... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx hey reed thrush, xxx it's four or five inches tall xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx a reed thrush, xxx mount tsukuba xxx in a corner of the sky 
xxxxxx to the rhythm xxx of a moorhen's cries... xxx a cloud speeds by 
xxxxxx mocking mokubo temple's xxx prayer gong... xxx a moorhen calls 
xxxxxx a single blade xxx of grass beckons... xxx the firefly 
xxxxxx kept as pets xxx by citizens of edo... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx he likes the grass xxx of my umbrella-hat... xxx flitting firefly 
xxxxxx the grass sniffed xxx by the dog... xxx a firefly flies 
xxxxxx over the crunch-crunch xxx of my eating... xxx a firefly flits 
xxxxxx "don't bump your head xxx on that stone!" xxx flitting firefly 
xxxxxx fly away, firefly xxx my hut's smoky! xxx smoky! 
xxxxxx called forth xxx by mr. long-beard... xxx the first firefly 
xxxxxx a mouth calling fireflies, xxx one xxx flies in 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx to the just-sold grass xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx one cocoon xxx in the stone buddha's xxx lap 
xxxxxx beyond the swarming xxx mosquitoes, the no-good xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx one mosquito xxx flies down my throat... xxx an uproar! 
xxxxxx my hut's fleas xxx how cute! xxx they sleep with me 
xxxxxx a flea jumps xxx in the laughing buddha's xxx mouth 
xxxxxx evening, xxx in a big sake cup xxx moon and a flea 
xxxxxx cicadas chirring xxx the red leaf flutters xxx down 
xxxxxx "first cicada!" xxx he says xxx while it pisses 
xxxxxx cooling his butt xxx toward the lake... xxx cicada singing 
xxxxxx the dog turns xxx in the cicada's direction... xxx mouth agape 
xxxxxx the morning-glories xxx brightly bloom... xxx and bonito! 
xxxxxx a third day xxx for citizens of edo... xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx sir whiskers xxx has first crack xxx at summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx mount fuji and bonito xxx on everyone's mind 
xxxxxx big tide, xxx the day flower clings xxx to the sand 
xxxxxx the day flower xxx splish-splash in the tide xxx blooms anyway 
xxxxxx blowing her snot xxx on the moonflower... xxx a young girl 
xxxxxx blowing her snot xxx on the moonflower... xxx granny 
xxxxxx the moonflowers xxx get a drenching... xxx from my spoon 
xxxxxx a big field xxx by a little village... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx words xxx are a waste of time... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx the naked child crawls, xxx the blooming xxx poppies 
xxxxxx like a poppy xxx how it sways... xxx front tooth 
xxxxxx looks like it's built xxx on lotus leaves... xxx the hut 
xxxxxx the day grows xxx devilishly long... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx holy jizo xxx in the blooming pinks... xxx dead center 
xxxxxx a blooming pink, xxx the big bee xxx stings it! 
xxxxxx geese and ducks xxx wipe their feet... xxx on the irises 
xxxxxx dangling from xxx the young buck's antler... xxx lilies 
xxxxxx dangling from xxx the young buck's antler xxx weeds 
xxxxxx all stretched out xxx the dog naps xxx in the lilies 
xxxxxx evening gloom, xxx a fawn's spots xxx on the lily 
xxxxxx over the duckweed xxx one by one in a row... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx duckweed blooms xxx "come! come to the old man's xxx teahouse!" 
xxxxxx the duckweed too xxx may have prayed... xxx blooming in the west 
xxxxxx "barley's autumn", xxx but in the hut of reeds xxx "fish autumn" 
xxxxxx ripened barley, xxx the rice paddy geese xxx with hoarse voices 
xxxxxx home village, xxx even on a thin post xxx moss has bloomed 
xxxxxx the thicket's bamboo xxx like all young folk xxx raising a ruckus 
xxxxxx depending on xxx the young bamboo... xxx little house 
xxxxxx summer's young bamboo, xxx joyful! xxx joyful! 
xxxxxx smelling the melon xxx shading his eyes to gaze... xxx a weasel 
xxxxxx i smell melons, xxx where might they be xxx katydid? 
xxxxxx the year's first melon xxx big as her head... xxx baby 
xxxxxx the morning-glories' rustle xxx mere extra... xxx eggplant 
xxxxxx caressed by citizens xxx of edo... xxx eggplant 
xxxxxx the eggplant i'm growing xxx in my hut... xxx a horror! 
xxxxxx just one blade xxx of thick summer grass xxx works fine 
xxxxxx candy lined up xxx on leaves of bamboo... xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx salty candy xxx for sale... xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx salty candy xxx for sale... xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx a candy stand in a nook xxx of suminoe... xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx spreading so thick xxx what an eyesore... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx autumn begins, xxx in a little pine island's xxx little nook 
xxxxxx the red gems xxx of a flower's buds... xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx autumn dusk, xxx a pretty little bird xxx passes by 
xxxxxx going out to fart xxx about ten times... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx on the loafer's back xxx it blows 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx sprinkled with dew... xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx old frog xxx dewdrops are tumbling xxx look! there! 
xxxxxx this morning xxx even my thatched hut xxx made-up with dew 
xxxxxx taking a leak xxx adding to the dew... xxx kogane field 
xxxxxx such cool air, xxx big pearls, little pearls xxx of dew 
xxxxxx dewdrop world, xxx clinging to dewdrops... xxx cormorant fishermen 
xxxxxx a dewdrop world, xxx dewy pinks xxx big and little 
xxxxxx dewdrops falling xxx drip-drip, this world xxx is good! 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx "goodbye, cruel xxx world!" 
xxxxxx three dewdrops, xxx ueno's cicadas xxx break out into song 
xxxxxx blowing a flute xxx to celebrate the silver dew... xxx my hometown 
xxxxxx on loincloth xxx and little red flowers... xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx trying to catch xxx the lightning bolt... xxx a child 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx mount asama's mist on the dinner tray xxx crawls 
xxxxxx on a holy shrine xxx in cogon grass... xxx a singing cicada 
xxxxxx the first to arise xxx a mosquito swarm... xxx ancestors' altar 
xxxxxx even on the ancestors' altar xxx they wriggle... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx ancestors' altar, xxx for gnawing silkworms, too xxx a tea offering 
xxxxxx fleas thumping xxx and the gnawing, gnawing xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx like bonfires for the dead xxx burning to nothing... xxx autumn dew 
xxxxxx bonfires for the dead, xxx in every direction xxx heike crabs 
xxxxxx even the insects sing: xxx "it's great tanabata! xxx tanabata!" 
xxxxxx greeting the stars xxx of tanabata xxx at my hut, pinks 
xxxxxx the sumo champion xxx caresses with his chin... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx wildflowers caressed xxx by his chin... xxx sumo champion 
xxxxxx my hut xxx and two out-of-sync xxx cloth-pounders 
xxxxxx where were you poked xxx to make that sound... xxx mountain deer? 
xxxxxx the rear goose, xxx well, well xxx a sore foot 
xxxxxx hut's evening xxx sparrows in the bamboo xxx geese in the rushes 
xxxxxx behind me, xxx it's become a night xxx of wild geese! 
xxxxxx rice field geese xxx glare at me xxx as i pass 
xxxxxx what an uproar, xxx those wild geese xxx are the shogun's! 
xxxxxx geese honking, xxx into mount asama's mist xxx a fire 
xxxxxx the wild geese xxx honking! honking! xxx about me 
xxxxxx from today on xxx you are japanese geese... xxx rest easy 
xxxxxx settling back xxx to dead silence... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx from you i could learn xxx where to sleep 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx from you i could learn xxx about travels! 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx from you i could learn xxx about travels! 
xxxxxx not landing xxx on the lake... xxx the geese's plan 
xxxxxx aiming their butts xxx at the evening moon... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx cricket, xxx on the young buck's antler's xxx tip 
xxxxxx gorging himself xxx on the cat's food... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx a grain of rice xxx stuck to his cheek... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx come again xxx i'll lend you my lap... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx the wildflowers xxx a-buzz with flies xxx making love 
xxxxxx blowing her nose xxx with a morning-glory... xxx a woman 
xxxxxx thatched with xxx morning-glories xxx my little hut 
xxxxxx the puppy's morning-glory xxx has bloomed... xxx at the gate 
xxxxxx just today and tomorrow xxx for your flirting... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx in this world xxx no wriggling allowed! xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx come one! come all! xxx the rustling xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx keeping holy binzuru xxx from being rubbed... xxx a red leaf 
xxxxxx one paulownia leaf xxx good choice! xxx it falls westward 
xxxxxx one paulownia leaf xxx then two, three, four... xxx a downpour! 
xxxxxx snagged by the buck's xxx antler, one xxx fallen leaf 
xxxxxx dying to the beat xxx of the prayer to buddha... xxx one leaf falls 
xxxxxx from the thin curve xxx of the sickle moon... xxx one leaf falls 
xxxxxx pushing up through xxx seven feet of millet... xxx rose of sharon 
xxxxxx roses of sharon, xxx for generations xxx thin smoke rising 
xxxxxx the aging gourd xxx and i xxx cast our shadows 
xxxxxx shinano road's mountains xxx bearing down... xxx the cold! 
xxxxxx the year's not over xxx but spring comes anyway... xxx cats making love 
xxxxxx truthfully xxx it's cold, nothing more! xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx first winter rain, xxx songs in the tavern xxx become ripe 
xxxxxx the well bucket xxx for the "starlings" xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx tea is steaming xxx at the mountain temple... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx first winter rain, xxx a mad dash xxx to the mountain house 
xxxxxx while tying up xxx the maiden flowers... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx one persimmon xxx droops listlessly... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the blooming cockscomb xxx droops listlessly... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx stomping on the mum xxx the croaking frog 
xxxxxx in winter rain xxx toward the heart of darkness... xxx honking geese 
xxxxxx the winter rain xxx hurries to a finish... xxx little house 
xxxxxx passing through evening xxx clumsily... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx first snow falling, xxx close your mouth xxx skillet! 
xxxxxx in first snow xxx digesting his rice cake... xxx the crow 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx atop the rice bag xxx a little lamp 
xxxxxx in first snow xxx the dog goes first... xxx two-penny bridge 
xxxxxx well here it is, xxx the place i'll die? xxx five feet of snow 
xxxxxx to my open palms xxx snowflakes flitting xxx down 
xxxxxx softly, softly xxx blanketed with snow... xxx my residence 
xxxxxx on my thin legs xxx smack! smack! xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx sweeping soot xxx off the dog's head, too 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx so much soot to sweep xxx at zenko temple 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers, xxx seven feet away xxx a little one sings 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx now, even i return xxx to my home village 
xxxxxx mountain castle, xxx even in a little field xxx gifts of new clothes 
xxxxxx at the sunset bell xxx one ear plugged... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx the cricket crawls in xxx chirping... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx the owl laughs xxx hoo-hoo! hoo-hoo! xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx in dream world xxx was i laughing at a turtle? xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx alit on it first... xxx charcoal bag 
xxxxxx mount saga, xxx with the natto soup xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx my natto shares xxx my pillow... xxx my night's sleep 
xxxxxx "come and get it!" xxx boiled pufferfish xxx at a sumida river inn 
xxxxxx "come and get xxx your boar stew!" xxx sumida river inn 
xxxxxx "come and get xxx your boar stew!" xxx sumida river inn 
xxxxxx "come and get it!" xxx boiled pufferfish xxx at a sumida river inn 
xxxxxx were you born xxx tenth month, tenth day? xxx wren 
xxxxxx as evening falls xxx in nihonbashi, a chorus xxx of plovers 
xxxxxx slapping the big xxx chrysanthemum's face... xxx falling leaf 
xxxxxx fallen leaves, xxx not a single crow xxx is irksome 
xxxxxx even newborn leaves xxx turned red... xxx fall like tears 
xxxxxx on purple clouds xxx when will i set sail? xxx western sea 
xxxxxx what a shame! xxx how many canes prop you up xxx old pine? 
xxxxxx a five-inch nail, xxx the pine tree xxx is weeping 
xxxxxx a "lost dog" sign xxx nailed deep xxx into the oak 
xxxxxx not yet buddha, xxx the mindless old xxx pine 
xxxxxx not yet buddha, xxx restless old xxx pine 
xxxxxx in pine-tree shade xxx sleeping, eating... xxx sixty provinces! 
xxxxxx even for bamboo xxx there's nothing but xxx crookedness 
xxxxxx bamboo grove, xxx here, too, there's no xxx perfection 
xxxxxx a thousand years xxx until the next life? xxx mr. and mrs. crane 
xxxxxx at my hut too xxx holding a child, listening... xxx evening crane 
xxxxxx are your thousand years xxx ending today? xxx song of the crane 
xxxxxx maybe water's boiling xxx in the big kettle... xxx turtle's nightmare? 
xxxxxx and how old are you xxx mr. turtle? xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx with a thump, thump xxx the turtle drags xxx along 
xxxxxx carry me off too xxx wherever you like... xxx beach turtle 
xxxxxx the stray cat xxx makes buddha's lap xxx her pillow 
xxxxxx filled with shame xxx flat to the ground... xxx the thief cat 
xxxxxx born in the pines xxx of matsushima... xxx this little nook 
xxxxxx born in the pines xxx of the pine islands... xxx this little nook 
xxxxxx my dead mother, xxx every time i see the ocean xxx every time... 
xxxxxx on purple clouds xxx when will i set sail? xxx western sea 
xxxxxx deep inside xxx of everyone, mount asama's xxx smoke 
xxxxxx first month, xxx instead of plum blossoms xxx a blizzard 
xxxxxx no customary xxx new year's day xxx for the slob 
xxxxxx joining xxx the brushwood fire's smoke xxx morning's blossoms 
xxxxxx with gums for grinders xxx greeting the blossoming xxx spring 
xxxxxx just when my house xxx has gotten used to deep snow... xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx do not think me xxx a poor-spirited soul... xxx mankind's spring 
xxxxxx a world of plum blossoms xxx and willows! xxx mankind's spring 
xxxxxx a world of plum blossoms xxx and willows! xxx mankind's spring 
xxxxxx do not think me xxx a poor-spirited soul... xxx ["mankind's spring" or "others celebrate spring"] 
xxxxxx mankind's day, xxx but nothing special xxx in my rice gruel 
xxxxxx back from holiday xxx the servant brings a friend... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx servants' holiday, xxx the great festival shrine xxx passes by 
xxxxxx joining the travelers xxx on servants' holiday... xxx a huge man 
xxxxxx a servant on holiday xxx behind me says a prayer... xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx lucky beans xxx and lucky tea xxx just for me alone 
xxxxxx spring at my gate, xxx the first new year's greeting xxx from sparrows 
xxxxxx a kyoto suburb, xxx even flying kites xxx is hard 
xxxxxx even the beggar xxx hopes to get rich... xxx god of wealth singers 
xxxxxx a beggar's new year's song xxx too xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx one leaf xxx for the nightingale... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx dirty nails xxx facing my new year's dish xxx ashamed 
xxxxxx blatantly the snow xxx falls pit-a-pat... xxx spring peace 
xxxxxx the lame chicken xxx dragging, dragging... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx to the beat xxx of a pheasant's cries xxx spring dusk 
xxxxxx hey spear holder! xxx don't let the spring xxx escape! 
xxxxxx small talk xxx down in the cellar... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx first thing after waking up xxx spring rain xxx in my eyes 
xxxxxx letting her parent carry xxx the paper lantern... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx the uneaten ducks xxx are quacking 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx a mouse licking up xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx in one boat xxx a horse rides too... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the haystack xxx soaking with rain... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx smoking a pipe xxx by lantern light... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx his butt cooled xxx by the spring breeze xxx roof thatcher 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx purified at a shrine xxx the dog comes home 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a mouse licking up xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx oman's cloth simply xxx blowing 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the fence's tea strainer xxx blowing 
xxxxxx crane in the rushes xxx the evening's haze xxx is your doing 
xxxxxx night of haze xxx with a bellyful of rice cakes... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx even in spring mist xxx it's snow-covered... xxx my home 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx with their eyes sewn shut xxx geese honking 
xxxxxx all is misty xxx even my eyes! xxx from this new year on 
xxxxxx with the pounding xxx of a pestle xxx the mist gathers 
xxxxxx don't cry, children! xxx the red mist xxx has passed away 
xxxxxx western mountains xxx when i'm carried away xxx which mist will i ride? 
xxxxxx the moon xxx in buddha's bucket, too... xxx mist-covered 
xxxxxx you, too, turn to xxx heat shimmers... xxx my thatched house 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx from inside the rice cake tub xxx one more 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx chasing the village crow xxx with a hoe 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx the child's lost chicken xxx struts in the distance 
xxxxxx my hut's snow xxx not very good xxx at dying 
xxxxxx geese and ducks xxx honking, quacking it away... xxx melting snow 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx when the snow finally melts xxx mosquitoes whine 
xxxxxx come, sparrows xxx in all four corners the gate's xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx the momentous snow xxx has melted away... xxx late riser 
xxxxxx servants take a break xxx from their migration... xxx kite flying 
xxxxxx migrating servants, xxx wherever you go, the same xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx the widow, too xxx leaves a doll xxx among the cherry trees 
xxxxxx picking herbs, xxx on my coat a croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx on the old umbrella-hat xxx smack! smack! xxx threshing tea leaves 
xxxxxx a mountain crow xxx helps the fire setters... xxx little thicket 
xxxxxx grass fire on its way xxx to the hot tub xxx in the field 
xxxxxx the children xxx make it a playground... xxx burnt field 
xxxxxx as if the villagers xxx are frozen... xxx burning field 
xxxxxx fire on field and mountain, xxx at night this world xxx ain't bad! 
xxxxxx where i planted seeds xxx oh well! xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx the chicken xxx is standing guard... xxx my grafted tree 
xxxxxx hut's cat xxx deep in the sake goblet xxx yowling! 
xxxxxx hey big cat xxx shake a leg! xxx the wife calls 
xxxxxx smeared with flowering xxx rape, here comes xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx o flowering mustard xxx blow the cat's prowling route xxx shut! 
xxxxxx kasuga field, xxx even the rascally buck xxx sheds his antlers 
xxxxxx may i offer you xxx a head scarf? xxx buck after antler-shedding 
xxxxxx the buck looks xxx at cherry blossoms... xxx shedding his antlers 
xxxxxx at my house xxx there's nothing! xxx the bird's left the nest 
xxxxxx on the tip of the xxx newly sprouted bamboo... xxx a baby sparrow 
xxxxxx taking turns xxx guarding the nest... xxx parent sparrows 
xxxxxx the baby sparrow xxx is allowed to play... xxx tatami mat 
xxxxxx baby sparrows, too xxx arrive for the buddha's xxx morning showing 
xxxxxx baby sparrow, xxx the dust in this hut xxx is filthy! 
xxxxxx in the great bronze xxx buddha's nose chirping... xxx sparrow babies 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx makes a face in the smoke... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx staying behind, xxx the nightingale's only xxx daughter 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx this fence is reserved xxx for you 
xxxxxx catching the spirit xxx of the nightingale's song... xxx samurai 
xxxxxx he seems to have xxx the nightingale's back... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx not at all concerned... xxx little gambling shack 
xxxxxx while imitating xxx a nightingale... xxx a nightingale! 
xxxxxx hey nightingale, xxx why the rush xxx to go so soon? 
xxxxxx hey cherry blossoms, xxx why the rush xxx to scatter so soon? 
xxxxxx nightingale, don't suffocate xxx from the pipe smoke! xxx edo mountain 
xxxxxx samurai, xxx even the nightingale xxx gives orders 
xxxxxx sing! sing! xxx though off key xxx my nightingale 
xxxxxx trying to sleep, xxx that nightingale on the eaves xxx is a nightingale! 
xxxxxx he's a prince xxx of a nightingale! xxx you could say 
xxxxxx arriving with faces that say xxx it's been a long time... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx seeing oi river xxx and then... xxx a lark 
xxxxxx a fishing boat rows xxx over blossoms... xxx a skylark 
xxxxxx coming down xxx to eat his lunch... xxx skylark 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx soup steam wafts over xxx wild grasses 
xxxxxx "the shrine in the field xxx is too red!" xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx around noon a pheasant xxx passes through... xxx the big sitting room 
xxxxxx "the crow took xxx the fried rice!" xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx the evening pheasant's xxx sleeping place... xxx a little shrine 
xxxxxx the evening pheasant xxx runs then stops... xxx grass and sky 
xxxxxx clamorous xxx wild geese who saw edo xxx returning home 
xxxxxx zenko temple, too xxx quickly passed over... xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx once again xxx the deer see them off.. xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx don't go geese! xxx everywhere it's a floating world xxx of sorrow 
xxxxxx don't go, geese! xxx the world sucks xxx everywhere 
xxxxxx trampling asakusa's xxx little fuji... xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx "hey puppy xxx come here!" croaks xxx the frog 
xxxxxx in leaves of grass xxx playing hide-and-seek... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx chin-deep xxx in the fallen blossoms... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx in his retreat xxx in the flowering mustard xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx enjoying your sex xxx so shamelessly? xxx frogs 
xxxxxx onto a straw lid xxx marked "smallpox" xxx hops a frog 
xxxxxx on the straw lid xxx of the smallpox god... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx facing every-which way xxx frog cousins xxx and second cousins! 
xxxxxx never opening xxx their mouths in vain... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx at mokubo temple xxx bunking on a flower... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx serene and still xxx the mountain-viewing xxx frog 
xxxxxx even around here xxx the world is good! xxx frogs croaking 
xxxxxx my back-alley home, xxx five feet of sky xxx but spring butterflies 
xxxxxx morning rain, xxx a butterfly licks xxx it up 
xxxxxx suruga road, xxx even the butterflies dream xxx about mount fuji 
xxxxxx weak tea, xxx every day the butterfly xxx stops by 
xxxxxx tea smoke, xxx into the butterfly's face xxx it blows 
xxxxxx a butterfly comes xxx to my good-for-nothing xxx hut 
xxxxxx amid butterflies xxx little butterflies xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx a butterfly, a cat xxx deep asleep... xxx temple sitting room 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow, xxx every day the butterfly xxx visits 
xxxxxx lending it xxx to the sleeping butterfly... xxx my knee 
xxxxxx stray cat xxx look! the butterfly's xxx well-behaved 
xxxxxx stuck to the dog xxx curled asleep... xxx a butterfly 
xxxxxx mountain bees xxx buzz-buzz pass through xxx the temple room 
xxxxxx the big crane walks xxx with great importance... xxx violets 
xxxxxx hopping over the river xxx of blooming violets... xxx pretty woman 
xxxxxx like playing cards xxx these blossoms of rape xxx at the gate 
xxxxxx even the bracken xxx are like nails... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx in grassy shade xxx looking like canes... xxx the bracken 
xxxxxx for toribe field's xxx holy jizo... xxx bracken 
xxxxxx even wild rose buds, xxx all eaten xxx by people 
xxxxxx kamakura, xxx who planted these camellias xxx in olden times? 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx a house with four walls xxx can't be found 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx the voices of children xxx sound reverent 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx the candy nightingale xxx opens his mouth 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx riding a dog xxx the peach boy 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx enough plum blossoms xxx for brewing tea 
xxxxxx nothing special xxx to the village dog... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx snatched xxx by the stray cat... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossoms xxx of the field dropped... xxx naughty dog 
xxxxxx someone chanting xxx the lotus sutra... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx waterfall's mist, xxx even here, off to the side xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx tucking himself in xxx under fallen blossoms xxx puppy 
xxxxxx in scattering blossoms xxx holding their breath... xxx sea gulls 
xxxxxx fallen blossoms, xxx the stylish woman leaves xxx her butt print 
xxxxxx baby grass, xxx the stylish woman leaves xxx her butt print 
xxxxxx riding in a palanquin xxx the blossom thief! xxx blossom thief! 
xxxxxx blossoming mountain, xxx come out and play xxx devil in me! 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms fall, xxx come out and play xxx devil in me! 
xxxxxx donning my umbrella-hat, xxx cherry blossoms portend xxx a lucky day 
xxxxxx sticking, sticking xxx to paper umbrellas... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx lining the bottom xxx of the trash can... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the cherry blossoms fall, xxx i apologize to a dog xxx in passing 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms xxx i waited and waited for... xxx i'm alone 
xxxxxx while viewing mountain xxx cherry blossoms... xxx a prayer 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms xxx to the prayer gong's beat xxx scatter 
xxxxxx from willow tree xxx from plum tree comes xxx the fox! 
xxxxxx from the willow xxx a ghost attacks! xxx the child 
xxxxxx summer night, xxx like a lump of fried rice xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx dewdrops spilling, xxx suddenly the nights xxx grow short 
xxxxxx dewdrops fell... xxx the nights xxx suddenly grew shorter 
xxxxxx in the middle of the short xxx summer night blooming... xxx azaleas 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx sister's silkworms xxx in a feeding frenzy 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx the silkworms' mouths xxx chomping 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx the hairdresser's wildflowers xxx blooming 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx an umbrella-shaped flower xxx has bloomed 
xxxxxx in the short summer night xxx wriggling to climax... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx the frogs croaking xxx trash talk 
xxxxxx the flower that looks xxx like a wind-chime blooms... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx oh cool cool xxx evening! xxx the month's last day 
xxxxxx it's a down, down xxx downtrodden land... xxx but cool! 
xxxxxx the cool, windy moon xxx is shut out too... xxx thatched hut 
xxxxxx what cool air, xxx snow and ice xxx two cents apiece 
xxxxxx in the cool air xxx me and flame-drawn xxx katydid 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx the evening mountain xxx becomes itself 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx like pillows beyond the gate xxx the mountains 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx again from the west xxx an evening shower 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx a moonlit night fit xxx for a god 
xxxxxx lying spread-eagle xxx cool xxx lonely 
xxxxxx nothing at all xxx but a calm heart xxx and cool air 
xxxxxx two blades of grass xxx cheer for the cloudburst xxx i bring 
xxxxxx blessings fall xxx on mount togakushi... xxx a cloudburst 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx the cloudburst just a spurt xxx but a good one 
xxxxxx perfectly round xxx the cloud's first xxx burst 
xxxxxx taking the cloudburst's xxx place xxx just teardrops 
xxxxxx a bowl to catch xxx the cloudburst... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx a summer rainstorm, xxx scratches xxx my itch 
xxxxxx a good omen, xxx in the west, deep red xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx on the tips xxx of my outstretched toes... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx noontime, xxx about pillow high xxx the billowing clouds 
xxxxxx the swimming flea xxx thinks to reach them... xxx peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx vain clouds xxx forming vain peaks xxx in vain 
xxxxxx watching the clouds xxx drifting to sleep... xxx summer mountain 
xxxxxx the nightingale's xxx good karma overflows... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx from the azaleas xxx the azaleas' pure xxx water 
xxxxxx flimsily xxx the morning-glories bloom... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even the horse bathes xxx in pure water 
xxxxxx new red flowers xxx have bloomed... xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx at my home xxx shinano's moon xxx and pure water! 
xxxxxx at the gate xxx a palm-sized rice field too xxx has greened 
xxxxxx my portion of rice field xxx turns green too... xxx evening's wooden drum 
xxxxxx my side-field of rice, xxx the first to turn xxx green! green! 
xxxxxx even under the eaves xxx human handiwork... xxx a green rice field 
xxxxxx festival, xxx for whose treasured child xxx this red fan? 
xxxxxx festival, xxx snapping my fan xxx wore me out 
xxxxxx a flower shaped xxx like a bon lantern... xxx purification ritual 
xxxxxx the sea gull xxx is an old devotee... xxx river shrine 
xxxxxx are you renting a home xxx sea gull? xxx river shrine 
xxxxxx night fishing, xxx on st. jizo's lap xxx a short sword 
xxxxxx moonlight nook, xxx from the pine's shadow xxx night fishing 
xxxxxx cormorant boat, xxx her children cry in the window xxx left behind 
xxxxxx sweat drops from cows xxx from horses... xxx blades of grass 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx one drop of sweat xxx soon, another 
xxxxxx this day perhaps xxx even i'll do it... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx in our new summer robes xxx the gate's nettle tree xxx and me 
xxxxxx the first and best xxx of shitaya ward... xxx in summer kimono 
xxxxxx with a face like he's licked xxx persimmon paper... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx hating the "four" xxx of fourth month... xxx the change to summer clothes 
xxxxxx stretching out xxx the hand's wrinkles... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx letting white cloud xxx into the sleeves... xxx summer robe 
xxxxxx waterfall's mist xxx crawls into my sleeves... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx putting on xxx the summer kimono... xxx a perfect square! 
xxxxxx in his summer kimono xxx more and more square... xxx old man 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx dangling into the mosquito net xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx festival day, xxx some treasured child's xxx red fan 
xxxxxx western mountains, xxx i'm off to play paper fan gliders xxx under the moon 
xxxxxx shading xxx mr. long-beard's eyes... xxx a paper fan from kyoto 
xxxxxx like a belt encircling xxx the mountain's hips... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx the smudge pot smoke xxx is a comfort... xxx my life alone 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx the smudge pots trailing xxx mist 
xxxxxx even water sprinkled xxx at the gate costs money... xxx life in edo 
xxxxxx airing out the bedding, xxx atop the futon xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx cool air is restored... xxx my house 
xxxxxx this evening's xxx cooling off... xxx not quite flawless 
xxxxxx a perfect evening cool xxx but not without xxx scratches 
xxxxxx cool air at the gate, xxx the evening isn't xxx soot-grimed 
xxxxxx just me xxx and a stalk of bamboo... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx feeding on xxx old basho's legs... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx night after night xxx this is true kyoto! xxx cooling at the gate 
xxxxxx the mountain hermit xxx under a bundle of snow xxx kyoto-bound 
xxxxxx the one-foot waterfall xxx is also cool... xxx sweet jelly 
xxxxxx little tub, xxx on top of mount fuji xxx sweet jelly 
xxxxxx traveler, xxx on a mountain he sits xxx with sweet jelly 
xxxxxx from a tub xxx of sweet jelly it flows... xxx minano river 
xxxxxx sweet jelly xxx along with the plume grass xxx sways 
xxxxxx the moon like a tub xxx has risen... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx how many gallons xxx of edo's rain did you drink? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx almost spitting distance xxx to edo, eh? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx kiso mountains, xxx plowing through the snow xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx a little smoke xxx makes a cloud... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx the young buck's xxx antlers tilting... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx i hope your busy-ness xxx isn't contagious xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx which, oh which xxx is your mountain? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx heard so rarely xxx makes it precious... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx even you xxx have "flea-spotting eyes"... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you half-asleep? xxx foolish cuckoo xxx foolish crow 
xxxxxx are you half-asleep? xxx prostitute quarter xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you all half-sleeping? xxx prostitute, horse xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx the rain of great edo xxx is sweet! 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx you know when it's time xxx to run 
xxxxxx hey cuckoo, xxx are you scolding xxx the loafer? 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx hot tub steam stirs xxx as does the grass 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx hot tub steam stirs xxx grass stirs 
xxxxxx don't suffocate xxx from the hermit's pipe smoke! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you trying not to xxx look at my hut? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx in a previous xxx life, my cousin? xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx pass your solitude xxx to me... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx so my hut xxx is your favorite! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx on the sign xxx on my gate singing xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx even the priceless nightingale xxx well! xxx warbles in summer 
xxxxxx clinging to xxx the raftsman's chopstick... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx sprinkled on xxx the raftsman's rice... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx the raftsman xxx has had his fill... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx on the raftsman's chopstick xxx once again... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx thatched house, xxx catching and releasing xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx from the plume grass xxx from the pine xxx fireflies! fireflies! 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow, xxx from the nape of my neck xxx a firefly flits 
xxxxxx old wall, xxx for no particular reason xxx fireflies visit 
xxxxxx he flips a page xxx of the lotus sutra... xxx a firefly flies 
xxxxxx mokubo temple, xxx the dog calls, too xxx fireflies come 
xxxxxx don't go, firefly! xxx even at night kyoto xxx is noisy 
xxxxxx go away, firefly! xxx the teapot's mouth xxx gapes 
xxxxxx my dwelling, xxx mingling with the mice xxx pretty fireflies 
xxxxxx mosquito larvae, xxx in a day how many xxx ups and downs? 
xxxxxx amid the buzz of mosquitoes xxx a bit of red... xxx wildflower 
xxxxxx into the mosquito swarm xxx take care! take care! xxx swallow 
xxxxxx mosquito swarm, xxx into my sleeve xxx they rise 
xxxxxx comparing butts xxx in kannon's temple... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx where there's people xxx there's mosquitoes... xxx admiring the willow 
xxxxxx my hut's flies xxx come along too... xxx returning home 
xxxxxx pesky flea xxx caught in my hand xxx become a buddha! 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx to fuji! to fuji! xxx fleas jumping off 
xxxxxx the gate's nettle tree xxx catches fleas xxx from people 
xxxxxx grassy meadow, xxx the flea jumps xxx to points unknown 
xxxxxx tired of walking xxx on my wrinkled arm xxx the flea jumps 
xxxxxx hop off, fleas xxx and see xxx matsushima 
xxxxxx even flea bites xxx on the young xxx are pretty 
xxxxxx held in contempt xxx by fleas and flies... xxx today too ends 
xxxxxx bloated flea xxx are you walking it off? xxx up a tree 
xxxxxx a skinny flea xxx makes a healthy ruckus... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx a good day, eh? xxx fleas dancing xxx and hopping 
xxxxxx the silverfish scurry xxx away... xxx parents and children 
xxxxxx go ahead, make love! xxx make love! xxx summer cicadas 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx looking like an umbrella-hat xxx lake biwa 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx sticking to the sky xxx mogami river 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx my hut, too, becoming xxx stone 
xxxxxx silence, xxx boring into the rock xxx cicada song 
xxxxxx hush cicada! xxx mr. long-beard xxx has arrived 
xxxxxx temple mountain, xxx buzzing into my sleeve xxx a cicada 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx then flies in a flash xxx up my sleeve 
xxxxxx summer cicada, xxx even in his lovemaking break xxx singing! 
xxxxxx a life of running away xxx running away... xxx summer cicada 
xxxxxx mountain cicada, xxx singing, singing passes through xxx the big sitting room 
xxxxxx the snail-buddha xxx curls up xxx to sleep 
xxxxxx why xxx such careful consideration xxx snail? 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx buddha's face xxx on the snail 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx on buddha's face xxx a snail 
xxxxxx in evening moonlight xxx going bare-chested... xxx snail 
xxxxxx my soybean prayer beads xxx click and clack... xxx blooming poppies 
xxxxxx like a cow xxx the bee buzzes... xxx a peony 
xxxxxx looking pleased xxx sidelong glances xxx at the peony 
xxxxxx alongside xxx the beggar's pillow... xxx lotus leaves float 
xxxxxx whose house? xxx wafting over lotuses xxx evening's tea-and-rice 
xxxxxx the toddlers xxx put them in sake cups... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx lotus pond, xxx with a stuck-up attitude xxx the beggar's hut 
xxxxxx pinks, xxx one is blooming xxx thanks to the dew 
xxxxxx before xxx the red dog's yawn... xxx irises 
xxxxxx seaside temple, xxx among the wood chips xxx irises 
xxxxxx shading the arrowheads xxx from the sun... xxx irises 
xxxxxx well, well xxx the day is foolishly long... xxx irises 
xxxxxx tottering xxx amid the grasses... xxx an iris blooms 
xxxxxx the heat shimmers xxx in full bloom... xxx ripened barley 
xxxxxx made-to-order xxx for the morning-glories... xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx joyful! xxx the fence's little bamboo xxx at the peak of youth 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx at their peak... xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx joyful! xxx the fence's little bamboo xxx at the peak of youth 
xxxxxx "o great japan! xxx o world!" xxx the rustling young bamboo 
xxxxxx well, moon xxx now you have young pines! xxx young bamboo! 
xxxxxx play, pigeons xxx in my young bamboo! xxx young bamboo! 
xxxxxx it's called "young bamboo" xxx for one night only... xxx or two 
xxxxxx among the young bamboo xxx not a single one xxx flawless 
xxxxxx for the young bamboo xxx bold and fresh xxx green leaves 
xxxxxx young bamboo, xxx the blind dragonfly xxx carousing 
xxxxxx pretty, xxx the bitter bamboo shoots xxx swishing 
xxxxxx life in seclusion, xxx guarding the growing xxx bamboo shoots 
xxxxxx shoots of new bamboo, xxx not one of them xxx looks healthy 
xxxxxx a dewdrop spills, xxx the bamboo shoot xxx shivers 
xxxxxx shallow river, xxx a dawn moon xxx melons cooling 
xxxxxx in leafy shade xxx curled up with a melon... xxx a kitten 
xxxxxx if someone comes xxx change into frogs! xxx cooling melons 
xxxxxx unaware of the thief's xxx eyes, melons xxx cooling in water 
xxxxxx just one's enough xxx for deep, cool shade... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx holy binzuru and blossoms xxx of sleeping tree 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx on the road to fushimi xxx a dog 
xxxxxx nippy weather, xxx the meaning of "parent" xxx sinks in 
xxxxxx does the monkey understand xxx "morning cold"? xxx a little nod 
xxxxxx i rub, rub my ribs xxx still the night xxx is cold 
xxxxxx oh goddess of mercy xxx from this cold night xxx deliver me! 
xxxxxx from the pigeon coop xxx a head pokes out... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx night after night xxx the bug-eating bugs' xxx cold voices 
xxxxxx night after night xxx voices of the bug-eating bugs xxx grow colder 
xxxxxx bamboo in the window xxx stirs, night's cold xxx begins 
xxxxxx on ryogoku bridge xxx in both directions... xxx the cold night 
xxxxxx a rain cloud xxx hides the mountain... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx now i watch xxx with careful attention... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx since the day i knew xxx the word "parent"... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx since the day i knew xxx the word "parent"... xxx cold nights 
xxxxxx my arms and legs xxx thin as nails... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the god of death xxx has passed me over... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx at my hut too xxx the night turns long... xxx bottoms up! 
xxxxxx night at my hut, xxx this sinful oversleeping xxx weighs heavily! 
xxxxxx feeling afraid, xxx nights of so much sleep xxx are sinful! 
xxxxxx wooden clogs xxx clomp! clomp! xxx a long, weary night 
xxxxxx for you lice xxx is the night long? xxx is it lonely? 
xxxxxx long! xxx the night is long! xxx "praise amida..." 
xxxxxx a long night, xxx the devil in me xxx torments me 
xxxxxx "praise buddha! xxx praise buddha!" xxx it's a long night 
xxxxxx for you fleas xxx the night must be long... xxx and lonely? 
xxxxxx stray cat xxx all the long night is this your job? xxx yowling nearby 
xxxxxx thippity thump! xxx the fleas this long night xxx in a fine mood 
xxxxxx practicing calligraphy xxx on my belly... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx practicing calligraphy xxx on my belly... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx from tomorrow on xxx it's a winter sky... xxx butterflies, dragonflies! 
xxxxxx do you also know xxx that autumn's ending? xxx the monkey nods 
xxxxxx even plume grass xxx waves farewell, farewell... xxx to autumn 
xxxxxx looking pretty xxx in a hole in the paper door... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx "gimme that moon!" xxx cries the crying xxx child 
xxxxxx the sickle moon xxx all clouded over... xxx when i go out 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx going out xxx going back in 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx in the seat of honor xxx a katydid chirrs 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even in my soup xxx the harvest moon 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even in my soup xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx in the same boat as people xxx mountain crow 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx i send an unwilling flea xxx flying 
xxxxxx my evicted fleas xxx have returned... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx my evicted fleas xxx have returned... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx i send an unwilling flea xxx flying 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx escaping on foot... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx trampling the grave tablet xxx a crow caws 
xxxxxx on my arms and legs xxx thin as nails... xxx the autumn wind 
xxxxxx blowing on kumasaka's xxx great halberd... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx his destination xxx only the autumn wind... xxx little pilgrim 
xxxxxx millet and barnyard grass xxx taller than the house... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx at the dinner tray xxx dripping weeds... xxx an autumn gale 
xxxxxx a naked baby xxx and a crow raise a ruckus... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx in morning dew xxx a reaching-the-pure-land xxx lesson 
xxxxxx potato leaf, xxx a rice bowl's worth xxx of dew! 
xxxxxx a shiver xxx runs up my spine... xxx dew dripping down 
xxxxxx echigo horse, xxx sweeping away the evening dew xxx in passing 
xxxxxx among the dewdrops xxx the butterfly's mood xxx improves 
xxxxxx silver dewdrops xxx and my companion... xxx sharp shadows 
xxxxxx sucking up xxx all the dewdrops... xxx my thatched hut 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx soon enough xxx there go i 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx done with this crappy xxx world 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx "goodbye, cruel xxx world!" 
xxxxxx beads of dew xxx when did you sneak in? xxx earthen teapot 
xxxxxx the old wall's grass xxx trusting... xxx beads of dew 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx my tea tastes better... xxx falling mist 
xxxxxx even from my sleeves xxx mist rising... xxx mountain road 
xxxxxx the mountain mist xxx rushes through... xxx the sitting room 
xxxxxx maybe the wagtail xxx put it there... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx even the eaves' thatch xxx chopsticks xxx of plume grass 
xxxxxx in twilight the big xxx sumo match drum... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the morning-glories xxx bloom so briefly... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx field by my hut, xxx no thank-you offering xxx for the scarecrow 
xxxxxx in the rain shower xxx with a runny nose... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx the nettle tree looks xxx like a far-off mountain... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx my neighbor and i xxx have an understanding... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx imitating xxx the owl's hoots... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx craps in the bush clover xxx and moves on 
xxxxxx leasing his antler xxx to the cicada... xxx the young buck 
xxxxxx don't cry, geese, xxx everywhere, the same xxx floating world 
xxxxxx geese flying south, xxx the ducks at the gate xxx cheer them on 
xxxxxx the frog enters his hole xxx in the future buddha xxx he trusts 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx a green plant-like insect xxx singing 
xxxxxx stop again! xxx with your lantern stop! xxx a green insect 
xxxxxx autumn butterfly xxx on the scarecrow's sleeve xxx clinging 
xxxxxx glared at xxx by the dragonfly... xxx the buddha 
xxxxxx the dragonfly xxx dips his butt... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx don't be lazy! xxx o dragonfly turned xxx so red 
xxxxxx scolding the cricket xxx in my sleep... xxx thatched hut 
xxxxxx the crickets raise xxx a ruckus... xxx another month ends 
xxxxxx inside the broom xxx i'm sweeping with... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx you be good xxx and guard the house... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx up to today xxx such a healthy singer... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx the grain grinder xxx gives it a scolding... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx still no wife xxx his voice grows hoarse... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx on the bridge pile xxx smeared with mud... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx do you think my head's xxx grass? xxx katydid 
xxxxxx do you think my head's xxx grass? xxx grasshopper 
xxxxxx the emaciated grass xxx totters xxx into bloom 
xxxxxx it's the horseflies' xxx playground... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum blooming xxx horse-dung mountain... xxx one scene 
xxxxxx evening, xxx he wipes horse dung off his hand xxx with a chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx every morning the fleas' xxx hideout 
xxxxxx with one branch xxx it blocks the gate... xxx bush clover 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx trusting in the buddha xxx rice plants bloom 
xxxxxx old thicket, xxx a nook of rice xxx five or six feet tall 
xxxxxx more cutting than my hut's xxx old sword... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx persimmon tree, xxx the color of gold coins xxx its leaves 
xxxxxx persimmon leaves, xxx once they turn crimson xxx game over 
xxxxxx after great effort xxx picking the big chestnut... xxx a wormhole 
xxxxxx grassy meadow, xxx letting the child harvest one xxx chestnut 
xxxxxx worm-eaten, xxx the best chestnut! xxx the best! 
xxxxxx in mountain shade xxx rest without a care! xxx nut-less chestnut tree 
xxxxxx it's so pretty! xxx so pretty! xxx the poison mushroom 
xxxxxx watch out, kids! xxx don't let those red mushrooms xxx cast a spell 
xxxxxx watch out, kids! xxx don't turn into red xxx mushrooms 
xxxxxx now and then xxx on the post of my hut... xxx gathering mushrooms 
xxxxxx coating xxx the red leaf... xxx the cold 
xxxxxx in my thatched hut xxx even dreaming xxx the cold 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx round as the moon xxx the tossed-out ice 
xxxxxx a nightingale makes his rounds xxx eave to eave... xxx a spring day in winter 
xxxxxx today too, today too xxx on a spring day in winter xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx the gray starling xxx rushes his song... xxx a spring day in winter 
xxxxxx heron on a post, xxx how is your year xxx ending? 
xxxxxx end quickly! xxx this year, you've been xxx an evil one 
xxxxxx the owl's year xxx is running out... xxx atop the pole 
xxxxxx misty, xxx the year's last day xxx kan-ei temple 
xxxxxx what will be, will be, xxx on the year's last day xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx evening of the year's xxx last day... xxx flitting snow 
xxxxxx for our sake enduring xxx the winter rain... xxx stone buddha 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx i meet my hut's cat xxx at the door 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx the night fisherman xxx with his mother 
xxxxxx thatched hut, xxx the chrysanthemum hit first xxx by winter rain 
xxxxxx spelling "japan" xxx in the sand... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx taking aim xxx at the blooming cockscomb... xxx slanting winter rain 
xxxxxx the cotton bolls burst xxx in secret... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx wearing a straw bag xxx on mount hakone 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx wearing a straw bag he walks along xxx on mount hakone 
xxxxxx rented house, xxx the village's best spot xxx for basking in the winter sun 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx like my worst enemy xxx damn you! 
xxxxxx the year's first snow xxx all trampled... xxx by the crows 
xxxxxx the first snow xxx makes fried rice balls... xxx of mountains 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx bordering the outhouse xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx in the tree's shade xxx a shinto flute 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx and then, soon enough xxx three or four feet 
xxxxxx first snowfall xxx on irises in the eaves xxx softly, softly 
xxxxxx looking delicious xxx the snow flitting softly xxx softly 
xxxxxx chop-chopping xxx a mountain of snow... xxx a man alone 
xxxxxx a big snow, xxx straight above me xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx deep snow, xxx on the signpost xxx a crow caws 
xxxxxx heavy snow, xxx from the dinner tray's edge xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx geese and gulls xxx raise a ruckus... xxx "it's my snow!" 
xxxxxx by the light of the snow xxx under the window... xxx gambling 
xxxxxx falling snow, xxx yesterday it wasn't there xxx "empty house" sign 
xxxxxx snowy night, xxx near the hut of reeds xxx milky way 
xxxxxx my village bell xxx heard maybe, deep xxx in the snow 
xxxxxx fall, hailstones! xxx with pillow on his head xxx a child 
xxxxxx falling on kumasaka's xxx great halberd... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx for the blooming cockscomb xxx thirty cudgels... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx come! come! xxx counting hailstones xxx as they fall 
xxxxxx a serving tray for the bride xxx on the little straw mat... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx hailstones, xxx look! there's one behind xxx brother's ear 
xxxxxx the child hugs xxx her cloth monkey... xxx hailstorm 
xxxxxx hailstones falling, xxx the paper dog, too xxx going nuts! 
xxxxxx one falls smack xxx amid the marsh tits... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx smacking the side xxx of morito's face... xxx hailstone 
xxxxxx the big chrysanthemum xxx wears a straw hat... xxx falling sleet 
xxxxxx the gatekeeper sweeps xxx a pile with his foot... xxx sleet 
xxxxxx up to my doorway xxx so quickly the fields xxx have withered 
xxxxxx at dawn by the plum tree xxx there's one too... xxx a monk beats his bowl 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx a bird recites a sutra xxx a monk beats a bowl 
xxxxxx admirable! xxx he beats the gourd xxx non-stop 
xxxxxx a cold, clear night, xxx a winter prayer for the plum tree xxx too 
xxxxxx two sleep xxx at the edge of the hearth xxx their pillows 
xxxxxx daybreak, xxx amida buddha's soot xxx is swept 
xxxxxx my hut's soot, xxx i go through the motion xxx of sweeping it 
xxxxxx sparrows at the gate xxx beg for rice... xxx soot-sweeping 
xxxxxx the daffodil too xxx covered with soot xxx stands 
xxxxxx soot sweeping, xxx even the turtle by the pond xxx gets swiped 
xxxxxx sweeping soot, xxx off daffodil, plum blossom xxx camellia 
xxxxxx dumping soot in a thicket, xxx daffodils, plum blossoms xxx camellias 
xxxxxx soot and dust dumping, xxx i bow to plum blossoms xxx and camellias 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx soot-covered plum blossoms xxx and camellias 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx i'll get to the bamboo soot-broom xxx by and by 
xxxxxx remote field, xxx hidden in trees, here too xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers, xxx don't kick that baby xxx to the rear! 
xxxxxx the twelfth month singers xxx are female... xxx our great age! 
xxxxxx women also xxx are twelfth month singers... xxx our great age! 
xxxxxx my child's rice cakes xxx my child's rice cakes... xxx all in a row 
xxxxxx the next batch of rice cakes xxx is for the crow... xxx saiho temple 
xxxxxx on the rice cake tub xxx a nightingale! xxx nightingale! 
xxxxxx on the rice cake tub xxx the nightingale perches xxx again 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx from the eaves a crow xxx sticks out his head 
xxxxxx my child can almost xxx carry them... xxx rice cakes for the neighbors 
xxxxxx to my home xxx he seemed to be coming... xxx neighbor with rice cakes 
xxxxxx in the shade xxx of the rice cake flower... xxx making baby laugh 
xxxxxx next in line xxx the cat... xxx gifts of new clothes 
xxxxxx whose child has dressed xxx the crossroads buddha? xxx new clothes 
xxxxxx year's end fair, xxx a straw bag on her head xxx she passes 
xxxxxx lucky beans xxx lucky pickled plums... xxx yet no teeth 
xxxxxx after the demons xxx have all gone... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx a toothless mouth cries xxx "luck indoors!" 
xxxxxx driving demons xxx into the darkness... xxx laughing 
xxxxxx takasago, xxx shouting away demons xxx a toothless one too 
xxxxxx trust, trust in buddha! xxx you're a year older too xxx dog 
xxxxxx a year older xxx the dog and the crow... xxx headcount 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx to drive out devils xxx to ise i go 
xxxxxx his shoulder aligned xxx with the sickle moon... xxx fisherman 
xxxxxx sowing a fistful xxx of wheat... xxx temple nook 
xxxxxx sowing a fistful xxx of wheat... xxx sparrows at the gate 
xxxxxx "are these the outskirts xxx of kyoto?" xxx woman in a paper robe 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx come! come! xxx my paper robe 
xxxxxx "from this tree on xxx am i in nara?" xxx woman in a paper robe 
xxxxxx well suited, xxx down the slope they go xxx in paper robes 
xxxxxx row of houses, xxx the people in paper robes xxx hard to count 
xxxxxx playing with the god's xxx sacred monkeys... xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx like in old china xxx to yoshino they go... xxx paper robes 
xxxxxx a face pokes out xxx the winter quilt... xxx "hey, vegetable man!" 
xxxxxx fool cat, xxx yet he knows which futon xxx is his 
xxxxxx won't be long now xxx i'll hear the wild geese... xxx futon 
xxxxxx the man who left xxx slept in a ball... xxx futon 
xxxxxx tucking into my futon xxx just like dharma xxx i sit 
xxxxxx tucking into my futon xxx tomorrow's straw sandals xxx by the pillow 
xxxxxx my eyes glaring, glaring, xxx just like dharma xxx in my futon 
xxxxxx waking up xxx to a row of dolls... xxx my futon 
xxxxxx my last resort, xxx i borrow the cat's xxx futon 
xxxxxx at my dwelling xxx the lumped-together snow... xxx foothills 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx with snow i make xxx lord buddha 
xxxxxx he rolls thin snow xxx into a buddha... xxx the child 
xxxxxx a sparrow chirping xxx in his lap... xxx snow buddha 
xxxxxx growing old too xxx i trust in a buddha xxx of snow 
xxxxxx ashamed, xxx even a child has made xxx a snow buddha 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx making a buddha of you xxx is hard too 
xxxxxx the snow buddha xxx likes the puppy xxx it seems 
xxxxxx grow old xxx at my gate, if you wish... xxx snow buddha 
xxxxxx naughty child, xxx instead of his chores xxx a snow buddha 
xxxxxx my snowball, xxx the horse xxx ate it 
xxxxxx to the beat xxx of the snowballs xxx he tumbles 
xxxxxx hurled, it lands xxx in my sleeve... xxx a snowball 
xxxxxx until the big chrysanthemum's xxx completely gobbled... xxx my winter seclusion 
xxxxxx he's called xxx the mum-gobbling bug... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx in great japan xxx women do it too... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx boars and bears xxx are my neighbors... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx pears and persimmons xxx left for the crows... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx in my winter seclusion xxx line of sight... xxx a little thicket 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx some little pest nibbles xxx my chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx come, sparrows! xxx get warm at my brazier xxx i'm a great hero! 
xxxxxx scrawny frog, hang tough! xxx issa xxx is here 
xxxxxx in my previous life xxx good seeds were sown... xxx my cozy brazier! 
xxxxxx on a clear morning xxx the coal fire in a crackling xxx mood 
xxxxxx more than enough xxx for priest issa... xxx one bag of coal 
xxxxxx morning's charcoal fire, xxx the mountain's pine breeze xxx wafting by 
xxxxxx whether upright xxx or crooked it's the same... xxx charcoal fire 
xxxxxx my pestle, too xxx for pounding charcoal xxx has grown old 
xxxxxx groping for it xxx to feed the fire... xxx coal dust 
xxxxxx for one person xxx it's more than enough... xxx gathered charcoal 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx one measure of charcoal too xxx on the ferry 
xxxxxx good luck god xxx come live here, please! xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx "o fudaraku xxx where waves pound the shore..." xxx winter's first charcoal fire 
xxxxxx though crooked xxx it's quite a sight... xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx whether upright xxx or crooked the same... xxx charcoal fire 
xxxxxx in the waiting time xxx even the dog won't come... xxx morning's charcoal fire 
xxxxxx stuck xxx to the fish-skewer xxx a bag of charcoal 
xxxxxx the cherry tree xxx that made blossom clouds xxx becomes charcoal 
xxxxxx the charcoal kiln's smoke xxx puff by puff... xxx tranquility 
xxxxxx charcoal kiln, xxx the cherry tree becoming xxx evening smoke 
xxxxxx charcoal kiln, xxx the soon-to-be-cooked xxx mountain cherry tree 
xxxxxx a charcoal kiln smokes, xxx doesn't feel xxx like twelfth month 
xxxxxx look, children! xxx the old man's charcoal kiln xxx is smoking 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx even a woman slurps xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx the horse peeks xxx over his shoulder... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx no pufferfish soup xxx for the lackey... xxx no view of mount fuji 
xxxxxx pufferfish soup, xxx turning my back xxx to mount hakone 
xxxxxx hey scops owl! xxx is the year's end xxx funny to you? 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx the nightingale's xxx singing lesson 
xxxxxx coming to count xxx my lap too... xxx the wren 
xxxxxx the reed house, xxx even on the pillow xxx a plover sings 
xxxxxx basking in the sun xxx with holy jizo... xxx a plover sings 
xxxxxx counting the remains xxx of kisa lagoon... xxx a singing plover 
xxxxxx clutching a piece xxx of kisa lagoon... xxx a singing plover 
xxxxxx the outhouse too xxx in a famous resort... xxx a plover sings 
xxxxxx i hear my father xxx and mother nagging... xxx plovers 
xxxxxx listening to father xxx and mother nag... xxx the plover 
xxxxxx stop crying! xxx spring's on its way xxx foolish plover 
xxxxxx chopping dried rape xxx another sound on suma beach... xxx singing plovers 
xxxxxx today too xxx keeping perfectly quiet... xxx little duck 
xxxxxx what a pity, xxx getting used to beans xxx ducks and gulls 
xxxxxx at all the edges xxx of great japan... xxx waterfowl 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx on the country's outskirts, too xxx waterfowl 
xxxxxx are you mad xxx at the human goblins? xxx face of the pufferfish 
xxxxxx among fallen leaves xxx cool and aloof... xxx storehouse 
xxxxxx solitude, xxx under the fallen leaves xxx my ancestors 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx behind the wall xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx in the meshes xxx of the net daffodils xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx there's a house! xxx a field full xxx of daffodils 
xxxxxx low-lying village, xxx at the outhouse, too xxx daffodils 
xxxxxx borrowing the umbrella-hat xxx daffodil, asleep... xxx little sparrow 
xxxxxx a harbor xxx of blooming daffodils... xxx tanjo temple 
xxxxxx daffodils, xxx and for good luck xxx a katydid! 
xxxxxx daffodils xxx grow into the fence... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx daffodils, xxx i show kazusa mountains xxx my back 
xxxxxx daffodils, xxx the old scarecrow xxx seems busy 
xxxxxx sir samurai xxx don't forget your umbrella! xxx daffodil 
xxxxxx borrowing the umbrella-hat xxx daffodil, asleep... xxx little sparrow 
xxxxxx playing hide-and-seek xxx in tea blossoms... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx the mountain road's xxx twisting, winding xxx heart 
xxxxxx hey little snow xxx it's new year's day! xxx new year's day! 
xxxxxx for them too xxx a new year's feast... xxx pigeons, sparrows 
xxxxxx let me help them xxx to celebrate the new year's day xxx pigeons and sparrows! 
xxxxxx another year xxx just taking up space... xxx my life 
xxxxxx first month, xxx on the crossroads buddha xxx a red skullcap 
xxxxxx the brushwood fire's smoke xxx coaxes xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx my spring xxx is lucky, lucky! xxx this morning's sky 
xxxxxx now a manly wind xxx blows... xxx spring island 
xxxxxx spring comes simply xxx with a pale blue xxx sky 
xxxxxx with that moon xxx and its halo... xxx spring has come 
xxxxxx hot bath steam, xxx it's become a moonlit xxx night of spring 
xxxxxx at evening xxx like washed-out ink... xxx the year's first sky 
xxxxxx a drab color xxx but it's the year's xxx first sky! 
xxxxxx facing fences, xxx just three feet wide xxx the year's first sky 
xxxxxx among the pines xxx just a piece of it but still... xxx the year's first sky! 
xxxxxx row of pines, xxx in patches between trees xxx the year's first sky 
xxxxxx praying the new year's god xxx will heal my weak foot... xxx again 
xxxxxx it's tiny xxx at my farmhouse... xxx new year's bonfire 
xxxxxx the smaller bonfire xxx of new year's decoration xxx is mine 
xxxxxx with a cheer xxx my hut's new year's decorations xxx up in smoke 
xxxxxx foot of the mountain, xxx without a cheer xxx my new year's bonfire 
xxxxxx this world of ours, xxx so fast the bonfires xxx burn out 
xxxxxx bonfire! xxx the world is turning xxx so fast 
xxxxxx young grasses xxx young pine... xxx my new year's decoration 
xxxxxx fresh straw for the garden! xxx a sparrow dances xxx a black kite wheels 
xxxxxx fresh straw for the garden, xxx about ten servants xxx at work 
xxxxxx a present, a present xxx a new year's present! xxx her pink cheeks 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx all morning they come by xxx for new year's gifts 
xxxxxx bancho town, xxx after dinner flying xxx a kite 
xxxxxx the big kite xxx cuts a brave figure... xxx sunset 
xxxxxx chasing the kite's tail xxx 'round and 'round... xxx puppy 
xxxxxx on one of edo's xxx mountains of rubbish... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the child on her back xxx points them out first... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx young folk, xxx even while picking my hut's herbs xxx they sing 
xxxxxx tree by the gate xxx the year's first bird song xxx a foolish crow 
xxxxxx "well, spring has come!" xxx the year's first xxx crow 
xxxxxx an earthen pot xxx and an earthen puppy... xxx spring peace 
xxxxxx an offering placard xxx in the farm field... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx in a thorn patch xxx some paper, to and fro... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx holding a spear xxx riding a horse... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx hey lice, xxx crawl after the departing xxx spring! 
xxxxxx a light snow xxx over fields, through woods... xxx pilgrims 
xxxxxx remembering xxx to fall again... xxx a light spring snow 
xxxxxx in a village xxx deep in the willows... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx potted plum tree xxx sparrows in bamboo... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx like a proper guest xxx the dog falls in... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx cheer up, owl! xxx the spring rain xxx is falling 
xxxxxx behind the thicket xxx an offering box... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx for every thicket xxx every thicket... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the horse's paper decorations xxx feel it first... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx with the spring breeze xxx spring reaches edo... xxx the willows! 
xxxxxx in the spring breeze xxx my second pipe's xxx smoke 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the great courtier xxx poops in the field 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a little thicket, little festival xxx little pilgrim 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx on holy jizo's lips xxx a grain of rice 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx packed with people xxx the mountain temple 
xxxxxx rice cake with bean paste xxx on holy jizo's lap xxx the spring breeze 
xxxxxx silver water flowing xxx toward the garden... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx on an earthen bridge xxx an offering of sake... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx steam from my bath xxx and the moonlight... xxx springtime! 
xxxxxx from the roof's overhang xxx dripping, dripping... xxx hazy moon 
xxxxxx over the pole i stuck xxx in the garden... xxx hazy moon 
xxxxxx in the mist xxx crows are rejoicing... xxx nothing else 
xxxxxx misty evening, xxx out the back door too xxx yoshiwara 
xxxxxx a custom-made mist xxx just for it... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx gambling in the field xxx a sermon in the thicket... xxx one mist 
xxxxxx one soars xxx released from the mist... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx snatching a jellied rice cake xxx in the mist... xxx crow 
xxxxxx even in the mist xxx my village xxx is a mess 
xxxxxx from the face xxx of the man yelling for me... xxx mist 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx the cat snores xxx deeply 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx off the verandah tumbles xxx the half-asleep cat 
xxxxxx the snow melting xxx now flows away... xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx without fanfare xxx the great snow has left... xxx mountain 
xxxxxx about ten cooking pots xxx upside-down... xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx the round patches xxx the square patches... xxx snow floats away! 
xxxxxx in the remote village xxx snow melting also xxx is not easy 
xxxxxx snow melting xxx the village brimming over... xxx with children! 
xxxxxx in my province xxx nothing blooming yet... xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx across the wide plain xxx a migrating servant xxx in a palanquin 
xxxxxx every house on the street xxx celebrates the festival... xxx clay dolls 
xxxxxx today xxx even in the mountain hut xxx rice cake for a doll 
xxxxxx thatched house, xxx on the doll's face dripping xxx rain 
xxxxxx a shelf of dolls xxx and pipe smoke... xxx one scene 
xxxxxx remote village, xxx they pound rice cakes xxx for their dolls 
xxxxxx oh sake cup xxx don't go floating away! xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx the chicken tries xxx walking on it first... xxx lid on the sunken hearth 
xxxxxx even while yawning xxx she keeps the tune... xxx tea picking 
xxxxxx shigaraki, xxx even the high priest sings xxx a tea-picking song 
xxxxxx in the thicket xxx behind the house, silence... xxx no one picking tea 
xxxxxx make love, crows xxx while you can! xxx burning fields 
xxxxxx children and frogs xxx raise a cheer... xxx the field on fire 
xxxxxx following a cloud xxx he plows... xxx the mountain's hip 
xxxxxx mocking the farmer xxx plowing, the strutting xxx crow 
xxxxxx he plows his field xxx an arm's length away... xxx sea of grebes 
xxxxxx plowing the field, xxx a shower of mountain xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx such yowling xxx don't turn to stone! xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx my hut, too, changed xxx to stone 
xxxxxx silence, xxx boring into the rock xxx cicada song 
xxxxxx the love-crazed cat xxx strangely on edge xxx wanders off 
xxxxxx plum trees are eyesores! xxx cherry trees have thorns! xxx cats in heat 
xxxxxx with a voice xxx like a temple bell... xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx the lover cats xxx bluntly go xxx their separate ways 
xxxxxx the lone orphan sparrow xxx nice xxx and plump 
xxxxxx come! come here! xxx digest your food xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx temple visit, xxx don't choke on the pipe smoke xxx baby sparrow! 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx safe in holy jizo's xxx sleeve 
xxxxxx "come to the bamboo! xxx come to the plum tree!" xxx mother sparrow calls 
xxxxxx flock of sparrows, xxx and not one of them xxx a stepchild 
xxxxxx coming to play xxx with me... xxx orphan sparrow 
xxxxxx a red berry xxx in its beak posing... xxx nightingale 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx drinks and bathes... xxx sewage canal 
xxxxxx in the nightingale's xxx song, steam xxx from the buddha's rice 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx only an off-the-cuff xxx song 
xxxxxx the nightingale's xxx "i'm perfect" face... xxx kyoto's mountain 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx flitting about makes his living xxx in the country 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx just a run-of-the-mill xxx face 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx just a run-of-the-mill xxx voice 
xxxxxx a nightingale, xxx plum trees in the countryside xxx should be blooming 
xxxxxx a nightingale, xxx touring the countryside xxx should be fun 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx doesn't bow... xxx plum trees in bloom 
xxxxxx nightingales, xxx country accents, too xxx in the morning sky 
xxxxxx a nightingale wipes xxx his muddy feet... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx hey nightingale xxx sing! sing! xxx the town's far away 
xxxxxx sing! sing! xxx off-key nightingale xxx at my window 
xxxxxx yamazaki, xxx the nightingale from the mountain, too xxx a third-class guest 
xxxxxx my friend's widow, xxx a nightingale! xxx a nightingale! 
xxxxxx dangling over xxx the fresh-planted tree... xxx a swallow 
xxxxxx wake up! wake up! my children, xxx swallows, pigeons xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx swallows, xxx these peach blossoms belong xxx to you 
xxxxxx flying swallows, xxx as if there's no turning back xxx for them 
xxxxxx not much of a flyer xxx my hut's xxx swallow! 
xxxxxx their cute butts suddenly xxx all in a row... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx before dinner xxx off to kyoto and back... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx at my hut, first thing, xxx the healthy face xxx of a swallow 
xxxxxx people call it xxx "empty belly" hunger... xxx morning lark 
xxxxxx people scatter xxx like ants... xxx the lark sings 
xxxxxx over musashi plain xxx only one... xxx skylark 
xxxxxx from the gate sentinel's xxx flowerpot... xxx a skylark! 
xxxxxx the rear of the thicket xxx still dark... xxx a lark sings 
xxxxxx a late riser xxx he's slow to leave my window... xxx pheasant 
xxxxxx splish splash xxx across the shallow river... xxx a pheasant! 
xxxxxx laying out my big mat xxx i make a pheasant xxx cry 
xxxxxx from the bucket xxx on the big roof... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx on the rice cake tub xxx tail hanging xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx go wake the pheasants xxx in the field! xxx crying pheasant 
xxxxxx "blossoms are falling! xxx falling!" the pheasant's xxx night cry 
xxxxxx sir whiskers gets an earful, xxx on tiptoe xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx as if it just spotted xxx a star xxx the pheasant cries 
xxxxxx in holy binzuru's lap xxx sound asleep... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx sticking their necks xxx into the temple hall xxx pheasants sing 
xxxxxx mountain pheasant xxx are you calling the wife? xxx scolding her? 
xxxxxx mountain pheasant, xxx is that your wife-calling xxx voice? 
xxxxxx how did the pine xxx of karasaki look? xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx all in a huff xxx seeing my face... xxx migrant goose 
xxxxxx piddling on the mat xxx as he flees... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx in grassy shade xxx acting stuck-up... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx lording over xxx the scattering blossoms... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx in the farm field xxx his wife hides... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx like he just now xxx spotted a star... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx for me all alone xxx his sober face... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx granny drying her hair xxx and a butterfly... xxx one straw mat 
xxxxxx the big rain xxx gushing down xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx even the buck's antlers xxx are a plaything... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx butterflies flitting, xxx the river laughing xxx ha-ha-ha! 
xxxxxx a butterfly xxx stuck fast to amida xxx buddha's cheek 
xxxxxx crestfallen xxx by the scattering blossoms... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx flitting butterflies, xxx thirty three thousand xxx three hundred! 
xxxxxx my muddy foot xxx left to the butterfly xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx vegetables! plum blossoms! xxx butterfly dances xxx from one to another 
xxxxxx spring butterfly xxx at the big sake cup... xxx sip again! 
xxxxxx blooming xxx with butterflies xxx the dead tree 
xxxxxx to wheat field, to vegetable patch xxx the little butterfly xxx dances 
xxxxxx fleas thumping xxx and the gnawing, gnawing xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx they're off to play xxx in yoshino... xxx my hut's bees 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx his mouth clacks shut... xxx clam 
xxxxxx no telling which xxx are poisonous... xxx new grasses 
xxxxxx conquered xxx by the young grasses... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx new grass growing, xxx a masterful xxx leaf arrangement! 
xxxxxx lovely, xxx even the meadow grasses xxx hit their peak young 
xxxxxx on their way to becoming xxx herb cakes xxx grasses turn green! green! 
xxxxxx from the rice cake tub xxx from the basin... xxx violets 
xxxxxx rape seeds cast xxx pell-mell too... xxx have bloomed 
xxxxxx the needle-like rape xxx has flowered! xxx flowered! 
xxxxxx buds in the thicket xxx that people missed xxx eaten by deer 
xxxxxx reaching toward xxx the marble shooter's marble... xxx camellias 
xxxxxx i call dibs xxx on the red ones! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx a hazy memory xxx of my granny's house 
xxxxxx the village of nondrinkers xxx is silent... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx facing xxx the beggar's window... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx facing xxx my humble window xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the valley's plum trees xxx in a flash deign xxx to bloom 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx a wrinkled old woman's xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx a stroke of rare luck xxx these plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx i'm the type xxx who'd rather have dumplings xxx than blossoms 
xxxxxx i'm the type xxx who prefers, over blossoms xxx dumplings 
xxxxxx my dear one's hut, xxx lost amid blooming xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx no favorite xxx blossoming tree's shade xxx for me 
xxxxxx little thief, xxx from deep in the blossoms xxx he comes 
xxxxxx in scattering blossoms xxx sin and karma... xxx white hair 
xxxxxx in scattering blossoms xxx holding out his bowl... xxx holy man 
xxxxxx even blossom viewing xxx becomes a chore... xxx growing old 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx a temporary toilet xxx in blossom shade 
xxxxxx like me xxx no good at dying... xxx blossoms at the gate 
xxxxxx something behind me xxx tingles my spine... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx straw sandals for sale xxx dangle... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx in one of great edo's xxx little nooks... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the cherry blossoms xxx that stirred me, shade me xxx no more 
xxxxxx only this year xxx this year, blooming! xxx old cherry tree 
xxxxxx this corrupt world xxx plastered xxx with cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry trees in bloom, xxx oh great japan! xxx japan! 
xxxxxx though less xxx than three feet tall... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx falling to my back xxx spread eagle... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx leaning on the fence xxx it flowers... xxx cherry tree 
xxxxxx mr. long-beard's xxx hoe stand... xxx blooming cherry tree 
xxxxxx hearing people's voices xxx they blush... xxx evening cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx leisure time, xxx in cherry blossom shade xxx picking fights 
xxxxxx the lost child xxx clutches them tightly... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx remote province, xxx even in a haunted place xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx peach tree, willow tree xxx catch the blossom-scented wind xxx of the cherry 
xxxxxx mountain cherry tree xxx though its bark peeling xxx blooming 
xxxxxx mountain cherry blossoms xxx fall! fall! xxx enough to fill my belly 
xxxxxx lord of the mountain's xxx cherry blossoms... xxx stone buddha 
xxxxxx evening, xxx even for a poor prayer "praise buddha!" xxx cherry blossoms scatter 
xxxxxx the sleeping puppy xxx gnaws xxx on the willow 
xxxxxx willow at the gate xxx strokes his sour xxx face 
xxxxxx like peaceful kannon xxx the man sleeps... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx a trifle xxx next to mount fuji... xxx willow 
xxxxxx while napping xxx swish-swish stroked xxx by the willow 
xxxxxx viewed between xxx the plowman's legs... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx a willow droops xxx and continuing the drooping... xxx shimosa mountains 
xxxxxx dawn comes quick xxx to their crowns... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx "dawn's coming quick!" xxx cries the town crier... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx my nights of carousing xxx over so soon! xxx so soon! 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx for seventeen years xxx one long sleep 
xxxxxx moving clouds, xxx step by step, so soon xxx the dawn 
xxxxxx one blade of grass xxx the cool wind xxx lives 
xxxxxx a water drop in grass xxx fresh-made... xxx cool wind 
xxxxxx the number one xxx best cool breeze... xxx outhouse 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx slips in slantwise... xxx my house 
xxxxxx cool air of edo, xxx today, tomorrow xxx that's all 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even for the dirt farmer xxx hot bath steam 
xxxxxx dayflowers, xxx even for the dirt farmer xxx hot bath steam 
xxxxxx old thicket, xxx the source of the cool xxx evening wind 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx tossing water on the xxx horse's rump 
xxxxxx becoming demons xxx becoming buddhas... xxx the midsummer clouds 
xxxxxx the grass cutter's xxx splish and splash... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx splish-splash the strutting xxx crow 
xxxxxx on one boat xxx all the wildflowers! xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx all too often, xxx the cloudburst just xxx a spurt 
xxxxxx from the west xxx from the north xxx cloudbursts taking turns 
xxxxxx sunset xxx takes the cloudburst's xxx place 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx the three-penny flower too xxx trembles 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx waking up alone xxx on a little pine island 
xxxxxx now the cloudburst xxx only a pitter xxx patter 
xxxxxx did you emerge xxx from the rice plants? xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx one by one xxx they rise and form... xxx peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx cloud mountain peaks xxx and hills 
xxxxxx "look! that cloud xxx looks like mount fuji!" xxx the crow caws 
xxxxxx one breeze xxx reaches the cellar... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx a world xxx of flowerless vines 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx a flower even buddha xxx would hate 
xxxxxx straw sandals for sale xxx hang in the pine... xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx the stingy farmer's rice field, xxx the first xxx to turn green 
xxxxxx three men xxx use it for a pillow... xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx lording over four xxx or five rice plants... xxx my house 
xxxxxx a good omen, xxx the green rice field's master xxx crawl outs 
xxxxxx firefly, are you planning xxx to sleep here? xxx bucket of summer flowers 
xxxxxx the little fence too xxx looks feminine... xxx plucked summer flowers 
xxxxxx cloud and fog xxx move aside! voices xxx descend mount fuji 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx just five feet tall xxx this mount fuji! 
xxxxxx because it's mount fuji xxx the heron's stride xxx is long 
xxxxxx though i can straddle xxx this mount fuji... xxx cool grass 
xxxxxx it's mount fuji's grass xxx but no trace xxx of cool air 
xxxxxx traveling crow xxx at edo's purification... xxx how many years? 
xxxxxx traveling crow xxx at edo's purification... xxx now you're old 
xxxxxx hey frogs xxx why the grumbling? xxx evening purification 
xxxxxx about ten frogs xxx in a row... xxx shrine boats 
xxxxxx the first one through xxx is the swallow... xxx purification hoop 
xxxxxx the dragonfly, too xxx works late... xxx night fishing 
xxxxxx my nights of pleasure xxx are ancient history... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx the dandelion gives xxx a nod... xxx my new summer robe 
xxxxxx like everyone else xxx i change to summer garb... xxx linen robe 
xxxxxx row of houses, xxx sticklers for propriety xxx in their new summer robes 
xxxxxx even he loses xxx his world-weary expression... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx called a crybaby xxx she starts crying... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx western mountains, xxx in summer kimono xxx trusting in the gods 
xxxxxx feeling chilly xxx a butterbur leaf for a hat... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx arranged crookedly xxx on an old keg... xxx summer kimonos 
xxxxxx i put on xxx my summer kimono, so quickly xxx wrinkled 
xxxxxx perfectly black xxx the big priest's xxx parasol 
xxxxxx living in a storehouse xxx like a pond snail xxx in my mosquito net, alone 
xxxxxx the fifty year-old son-in-law xxx hides his head... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx two hundred dinner trays xxx in a row... xxx fans fanning 
xxxxxx it crawls xxx to the sparrows' bed too... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx airing out the bedding, xxx he's blown away, still singing xxx katydid 
xxxxxx it's time to go xxx time to go! xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx she shaves a side of his head xxx while he nurses... xxx cool evening 
xxxxxx mother cools off, xxx the buddhist temple's xxx festive sash 
xxxxxx in a remote village xxx they're used to poverty... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx hidden in trees xxx praising amida buddha... xxx rice planter 
xxxxxx partaking xxx of the cloudburst... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx bats are flying, xxx let's go, then xxx to ryogoku bridge! 
xxxxxx mother bird molting, xxx her babies hide xxx when she calls 
xxxxxx molting birds, xxx which one is father? xxx mother? child? 
xxxxxx through the great red gate xxx no fear... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx to edo, to edo xxx off you go! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the gate's tree too xxx in good health... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx in this rain xxx we ain't going anywhere... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't disdain xxx my worldly hut xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx don't bump your head xxx on that sickle moon! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx day before yesterday xxx yesterday, today... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx on the lucky eighth day xxx of fourth month... xxx a mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx "this way to hell, xxx pilgrim!" xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx when i'm dead xxx sing my requiem xxx mountain cuckoo! 
xxxxxx like warbling pure haiku xxx mountain xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx "in the world of man xxx there are no blossoms!" xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx taking credit xxx for the cool breeze... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx holding his nose up xxx to the sunlight... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx is that next one xxx my pine island? xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx the back yard suits xxx the reed thrush... xxx thatched house 
xxxxxx at the market xxx with all his might xxx firefly flits 
xxxxxx dogs sparkling xxx with fireflies xxx sound asleep 
xxxxxx sound of a horse xxx gobbling grass... xxx fireflies flitting 
xxxxxx come, firefly! xxx on one blade of grass xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx first firefly, xxx the sky over kyoto xxx is smoggy! 
xxxxxx people's voices, xxx with all their might xxx the fireflies flit 
xxxxxx in the old quarter xxx without rhyme or reason... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx through a hole xxx in the mosquito swarm... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx mosquito swarm, xxx even you xxx have a narrow home 
xxxxxx without the column xxx of mosquitoes... xxx a bit lonely 
xxxxxx driven from many houses xxx here they come... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx while swatting a fly xxx "all praise to amida xxx buddha!" 
xxxxxx i sing the praises xxx of my fly-catching xxx house cat! 
xxxxxx don't chase, don't chase xxx children! xxx that flea has kids 
xxxxxx though it's cramped xxx practice your jumping! xxx hut's fleas 
xxxxxx borrowing the crossroads temple xxx from fleas and mosquitoes xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx borrowing my hut xxx from fleas and mosquitoes xxx i sleep 
xxxxxx the cicada chirrs xxx on the grazing horse's xxx cheek 
xxxxxx the chirring of summer cicadas xxx this world xxx of luxury! 
xxxxxx first cicada, xxx on the horse's head xxx a quick song 
xxxxxx little snail xxx look! look! xxx at your shadow 
xxxxxx little snail, xxx for the red flower xxx not even a glance 
xxxxxx does the red dawn xxx delight you xxx snail? 
xxxxxx look! they've lined up! xxx little bean-sized xxx snails 
xxxxxx playing follow the leader xxx little bean-sized xxx snails 
xxxxxx dayflowers, xxx even for the dirt farmer xxx hot bath steam 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even for the dirt farmer xxx hot bath steam 
xxxxxx dayflowers, xxx a loincloth airing xxx on a post 
xxxxxx kept cool xxx by the moonflowers... xxx my pillow 
xxxxxx in the soup bowl xxx suddenly the moonflower's xxx glow 
xxxxxx moonflowers, xxx for the festival guest too xxx a straw mat 
xxxxxx even the cat xxx who ate her kittens... xxx look! poppies 
xxxxxx unfolding to the rhythm xxx of washing feet... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx the cemetery guard xxx dries his loincloth... xxx lotus blossoms... 
xxxxxx move aside xxx cloud and fog! xxx lotuses are blooming 
xxxxxx move aside xxx butterflies and birds! xxx lotuses are blooming 
xxxxxx turning a cold shoulder xxx to the lotus pond... xxx outhouse 
xxxxxx the young buck's xxx mouth can't reach... xxx the iris 
xxxxxx swallows join in xxx the festival... xxx irises 
xxxxxx at my hut xxx an iris with the tiniest xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx the big horse's mouth xxx can't reach it... xxx blooming irises 
xxxxxx the mist 'round here xxx in full bloom... xxx ripened barley 
xxxxxx lording over xxx the black barley ears... xxx village dragonflies 
xxxxxx ears of barley, xxx with back-breaking effort xxx the little butterfly 
xxxxxx moss is blooming! xxx sparrows come xxx to hear me brag 
xxxxxx what a racket! xxx for bamboo and plume grass xxx the peak of youth 
xxxxxx greens! bamboo! xxx now enjoy their youth xxx at my hut's gate 
xxxxxx even the skinny bamboo xxx young and fresh! xxx charming! 
xxxxxx young bamboo xxx hiding the mountain... xxx iruma river 
xxxxxx keeping bamboo shoots xxx company, blooming xxx red flower 
xxxxxx perfectly still xxx the new red leaves... xxx a temple 
xxxxxx at the crossroads guard's xxx window and paper door... xxx fresh leaves 
xxxxxx why are you like this xxx new red leaves? xxx so flimsy! 
xxxxxx lying to sleep xxx even on my belly... xxx a fresh leaf 
xxxxxx on the old fence xxx to no avail... xxx fresh leaves 
xxxxxx for three neighbors xxx across the way... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx even new leaves xxx are shady characters... xxx potted tree 
xxxxxx fresh leaves again xxx make it hateful... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx home village, xxx my summer grove is small xxx but it's mine! 
xxxxxx the astringent persimmon tree's xxx reluctant xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx deutzia shrub, xxx among gods and beggars xxx it blooms 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx a big festival xxx in beggar-town 
xxxxxx the deutzia blossoms xxx utterly drenched... xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx not knowing that xxx autumn's begun, a child xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx "first autumn morning!" xxx just saying it... xxx lonely 
xxxxxx are you aware xxx that autumn has dawned? xxx meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx the monkey rides xxx his mother's back... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx practicing calligraphy xxx on my belly... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx practicing calligraphy xxx on my belly... xxx a long night 
xxxxxx another year closer xxx to sixty... xxx the cold night 
xxxxxx spoonbill, you walk xxx through that water xxx like it's chilly! 
xxxxxx cactuses, xxx a facelessly dull xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx outdoor kabuki xxx in the autumn evening's xxx dead center 
xxxxxx writing with a finger xxx in the clear blue sky... xxx "autumn dusk" 
xxxxxx instead of morning-glories xxx unfolding... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx crabs jam themselves xxx into the rushes... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx when heading to edo xxx edo, edo! xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the wolf too xxx peeks out his hole... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx from the grasses, too xxx milk flowing! xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx with cedars for a roof xxx the piss bucket... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx enchanted xxx i walk among straw stacks... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx stretching my legs xxx toward musashi plain... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx rain shower, xxx for granny's evergreen too xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx flowing in the hut's xxx gate... xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx my stars, xxx a gang of old men xxx in the milky way 
xxxxxx mokubo temple xxx covered in vomit... xxx tonight's moon 
xxxxxx only half there xxx but still the harvest moon! xxx harvest moon! 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx sawing the teeth of a comb xxx a hermit 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the loafer's blank xxx expression 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the mountain's shadow xxx is trembling 
xxxxxx the autumn wind xxx twisting and turning xxx enters my gate 
xxxxxx will these old knees xxx journey on? xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx sake in the red bowl xxx flowing... xxx autumn gale 
xxxxxx in this world xxx unprayed-for autumn gales xxx surely blow 
xxxxxx in the morning-glories xxx how many cups? xxx morning dew 
xxxxxx don't mope and moan! xxx tomorrow brings xxx tomorrow's dewdrops 
xxxxxx the silver dew xxx becoming round, this too xxx takes work! 
xxxxxx silver dewdrops, xxx beggar-town has festival xxx guests 
xxxxxx silver dewdrops, xxx with a bellyful of tea xxx crossing mount utsu 
xxxxxx simply trust! trust! xxx dewdrops spilling xxx down 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx today, too, xxx sowing hell seeds 
xxxxxx not at all aware xxx that life's dewdrop xxx is fading... 
xxxxxx a good world? xxx dewdrop xxx dribbling down 
xxxxxx thick-grown weeds, xxx among dewdrops a miller xxx singing 
xxxxxx lightning strikes! xxx i'm afraid xxx to die 
xxxxxx in the lightning xxx how he laughs... xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx the lightning xxx powerless to strike it... xxx thatched hut 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx his absentminded xxx expression 
xxxxxx the morning mist xxx scarcely clears away... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx from the great bronze xxx buddha's nostrils... xxx morning fog 
xxxxxx pouring out xxx the hanging temple bell... xxx mist 
xxxxxx mountain mist, xxx the gargoyle demon xxx devours it 
xxxxxx the great god's xxx monkeys are playing... xxx autumn mountain 
xxxxxx the more night falls xxx the more autumnal xxx the mountain 
xxxxxx night after night xxx like pillows... xxx the autumn mountains 
xxxxxx the baby monkey xxx puts it to good use... xxx field of flowers 
xxxxxx at the ancestors' altar xxx a grandchild's laughter xxx offered up 
xxxxxx ancestors' altar, xxx in the seat of honor xxx a katydid chirrs 
xxxxxx "marvelous law" written in fire, xxx but a black spot xxx a crow 
xxxxxx do you celebrate xxx tanabata too? xxx rustling mulberry leaves 
xxxxxx on tanabata night xxx hidden it blooms... xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx tanabata night, xxx straight from the heavens xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx the treasured child's xxx wormy scribbles... xxx mulberry leaf 
xxxxxx up in the heavens xxx the bridegroom star! xxx bridegroom star! 
xxxxxx o bridegroom star xxx look! piles xxx of blossoming rice 
xxxxxx the bride star xxx has funny manners... xxx tonight's rain 
xxxxxx a rogue firework xxx explodes too... xxx autumn festival 
xxxxxx following the times xxx the fireworks... xxx bigger and bigger! 
xxxxxx the sumo wrestler xxx has come from afar... xxx parents' grave 
xxxxxx not treading on the shadow xxx of the tomb's tree... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx seems like the owl xxx is laughing! xxx outdoor sumo match 
xxxxxx that gentle xxx moon-gazing face... xxx a scarecrow 
xxxxxx absent-minded xxx i'm the scarecrow's xxx replacement 
xxxxxx scarecrows standing, xxx three, four, five, six xxx houses for rent 
xxxxxx inspecting the red leaves xxx of mount tachida... xxx a scarecrow 
xxxxxx nowhere, nowhere xxx can a young scarecrow xxx be found 
xxxxxx take pity xxx on the flitting butterfly... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx at evening's bell xxx the fields are crowded... xxx with scarecrows! 
xxxxxx rain falls, xxx a night for pounding xxx the monk's rough clothes 
xxxxxx stirring the potato vine xxx from behind... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx night on mount uji, xxx wooden temple drums xxx and evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the dog too xxx runs out to play... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx in the tree by the gate xxx a widow crow... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx tama river, xxx in the temple's cool evening xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx hush, pigeon! xxx now the monk's rough clothes xxx are pounded 
xxxxxx my feet for a pillow xxx and my hands... xxx the friendly deer 
xxxxxx sweet harmony xxx to be reborn xxx a meadow butterfly! 
xxxxxx calling for a wife xxx the deer is no xxx spring chicken 
xxxxxx if you were human xxx you could be about fifty... xxx mating deer 
xxxxxx a shrike's voice, xxx did your bag of patience xxx break? 
xxxxxx green insect xxx and brown insect... xxx a duet 
xxxxxx green insect, black insect xxx which will lose xxx the singing match? 
xxxxxx the cricket xxx "cricky! cricky!" xxx brags about his beard 
xxxxxx that thicket xxx is reserved for you... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx wagging his beard xxx is singing 
xxxxxx carried in his beard xxx the katydid xxx is singing 
xxxxxx running away xxx snatching a bite of melon... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx gambling in the field, xxx in the pot xxx a katydid! 
xxxxxx the sparrows xxx go about their business... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx never saying die xxx that little wildflower xxx blooms too 
xxxxxx big chrysanthemum xxx despite its undefeated xxx demeanor... 
xxxxxx off in a corner xxx last year's champion xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx a prize-winning chrysanthemum! xxx the old man xxx weeps 
xxxxxx for the prize-winning xxx chrysanthemum, a gift xxx of rice cake 
xxxxxx a victory shout, xxx the old man's chrysanthemum xxx has won! 
xxxxxx trusting the dog xxx to guard the gate... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the treasure house xxx gives it shade... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx just today xxx home-grown in shinano... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx in life xxx there's no second place... xxx defeated chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the smell of piss xxx wafting too... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx seven tumble down xxx eight rise up... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx borrows it for a nap... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx the kitten plays xxx hide-and-seek... xxx in bush clover 
xxxxxx a tabby cat too xxx spends a night... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx even the dog xxx becomes a beneficiary... xxx harvested rice 
xxxxxx a small child xxx chews on a pipe... xxx they harvest the rice 
xxxxxx a fringe xxx for the emperor's sleeve... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx beckoning the lightning bolt xxx to strike... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx heads of the rushes, xxx in such a place xxx such a house! 
xxxxxx the blowing rushes xxx like celestial maidens xxx dancing 
xxxxxx some folks weave xxx and wear it... xxx cotton of the rushes 
xxxxxx sunset, xxx she calls for her child xxx in the blooming rushes 
xxxxxx adding its darkness xxx to the great darkness... xxx one leaf falls 
xxxxxx its leaves shed quickly xxx the paulownia tree looking xxx stuck-up 
xxxxxx on the sleeping dog xxx gently, a hat... xxx a leaf 
xxxxxx first winter month xxx tenth day... xxx a tea ceremony 
xxxxxx first winter month xxx tenth day... xxx a tea ceremony 
xxxxxx winter solstice in japan, xxx plum trees xxx in bloom! 
xxxxxx on honorable buddha's xxx honorable nose xxx an icicle 
xxxxxx for our sake enduring xxx the winter rain... xxx stone buddha 
xxxxxx "come, spring! xxx come, old man!" xxx the pigeon coos 
xxxxxx sifting the rice xxx and coins... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx a pile of firewood xxx a pile of rice bags... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx as of now xxx about ten winter storms... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx the abbot's monkey xxx hauls potatoes... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx big winter rain xxx or little winter rain... xxx sleeping is hard 
xxxxxx a scary sight xxx worse than a wolf! xxx winter rain leaking in 
xxxxxx reed mats, bamboo blinds xxx flap and clatter... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx tucking in xxx the blind priest... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx too many strings bend xxx the chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx forecasting the mountain xxx where it will die... xxx winter raincloud 
xxxxxx when the lame chicken xxx ventures outside... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the clams' cremation smoke xxx rises... xxx evening's winter rain 
xxxxxx huddled in one house xxx travelers, horses... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx mokubo temple xxx takes a pounding... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx unaware of the snare xxx in the winter rain... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx "if you're gonna blow xxx winter wind, then blow!' xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx foolish crow xxx do you think this first snow xxx is my fault? 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx didn't happen... xxx my house 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx someone has entered xxx the outhouse 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx a priest chants xxx his morning prayer 
xxxxxx the big chrysanthemum xxx wears a straw hat... xxx morning snow 
xxxxxx my world, xxx rice pounding echoes xxx over evening snow 
xxxxxx he's holding one xxx snowball... xxx the buddha 
xxxxxx holy binzuru's xxx eyes glittering... xxx this morning's snow 
xxxxxx snow falls on the mountain xxx my ears xxx are ringing 
xxxxxx just now it fell, xxx "a hailstone!" cries the toddler xxx over there!" 
xxxxxx no luck xxx for the woodpecker... xxx hail on the thicket 
xxxxxx to stand pissing xxx while hailstones fall... xxx quite a feat! 
xxxxxx the preacher's xxx hand gestures too... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx dharma's death-day xxx in umbrella shade... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx on dharma's death-day xxx spouting gibberish... xxx a plover 
xxxxxx dharma's death-day, xxx with a broom i draw xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx red bean gruel, xxx even on the patriarch's death-day xxx snow falling 
xxxxxx this day, xxx even stirring gruel xxx is a prayer! 
xxxxxx even pigeons xxx line up for their share... xxx patriarch's gruel 
xxxxxx great patriarch, xxx even unbelievers xxx get his gruel 
xxxxxx don't wake up xxx the nightingale! xxx a monk beating his bowl 
xxxxxx buddha's enlightenment day, xxx for me the same xxx skin and bones 
xxxxxx winter voice drills, xxx he looks like he swallowed xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx a good rain, xxx today's the day to unseal xxx the new tea 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx for the dog and all humans xxx soot sweeping 
xxxxxx the soot sweeping xxx riles him up... xxx hut's dog 
xxxxxx well, well xxx her face looks sixty... xxx the twelfth month singer 
xxxxxx my hut's rice field xxx at long last xxx becomes rice cakes! 
xxxxxx the chickens xxx trample the rice cakes xxx as they go 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx in the tub something extra... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx among the pines xxx sumiyoshi shrine 
xxxxxx in thicket shade xxx an old man pounds rice cakes xxx alone 
xxxxxx tree shade, xxx an old man pounds rice cakes xxx alone 
xxxxxx for asakusa's chickens, too xxx a end-of-year gift... xxx scattering rice 
xxxxxx as mount matchi's xxx evening grows dark... xxx winter skullcaps 
xxxxxx soon enough xxx the deer will eat it... xxx paper quilt 
xxxxxx hey sparrows xxx no pissing on my old xxx winter quilt! 
xxxxxx the owl gives xxx a good hard look... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx grains of rice xxx pecked by birds... xxx my futon 
xxxxxx my province, xxx the children also make xxx snow buddhas 
xxxxxx blocked with her xxx samisen's plectrum... xxx snowball 
xxxxxx wiping charcoal xxx from hands to post... xxx the old man 
xxxxxx charcoal kiln, xxx a glimpse of a village xxx through the smoke 
xxxxxx in the red bowl xxx a whorling dragon! xxx buckwheat noodles 
xxxxxx sitting cross-legged xxx a monkey joins too... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx slurping pufferfish soup, xxx behind me xxx cape izu 
xxxxxx even the painted devil xxx won't look...little bird warming xxx the hawk's nest 
xxxxxx crow at the gate xxx all night used by the hawk... xxx nest warmer 
xxxxxx two nest-warming birds xxx conversing xxx about something 
xxxxxx in the plum tree xxx are you praying hard xxx wren? 
xxxxxx smoke from brushwood xxx is rising... xxx play little wrens! 
xxxxxx pooping in the field, xxx avert your eyes xxx little wren! 
xxxxxx imitating the sleep talk xxx in the hut... xxx a plover sings 
xxxxxx a flock of plovers xxx gangs up on the dog xxx passing through 
xxxxxx from mokubo temple's xxx outhouse too... xxx a plover 
xxxxxx a good windbreak xxx for the waterfowl... xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx waterfowl, xxx in today's floating world xxx half-asleep 
xxxxxx the more you look at it xxx the more sour the face... xxx pufferfish 
xxxxxx float, sea slug, xxx buddha's law permeates xxx this world! 
xxxxxx not a devil xxx not a saint... xxx just a sea slug 
xxxxxx gliding dimly xxx in akashi bay... xxx a sea slug 
xxxxxx with a just-yanked xxx radish xxx pointing the way 
xxxxxx any grass serves xxx as the dog's toilet... xxx red leaves falling 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx on a pile of rice bags xxx the crow caws 
xxxxxx in winter's withering xxx all five hundred, sing! xxx mountain crows 
xxxxxx stand of trees, xxx my head too xxx withered and bare 
xxxxxx even you, wolf xxx go out dressed in a robe... xxx year of the dog 
xxxxxx new year's god, xxx once again i rely xxx on your help 
xxxxxx mankind's day, xxx from the main temple xxx the steam of bodies 
xxxxxx the sacred kite xxx grabbed by the nettle tree... xxx a bold one! 
xxxxxx a tough nettle tree... xxx grabbing xxx the sacred kite 
xxxxxx runaway kite! xxx the dog also eyes it xxx restlessly 
xxxxxx imitating his master xxx the dog watching xxx the kite 
xxxxxx among the chickens xxx a bitter feud... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx the day is long xxx the day is so long! xxx tears 
xxxxxx picking veggies xxx with a paper lantern... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx perfect calm, xxx shinran's pine xxx in the spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx gone vegetable-picking xxx with a little lantern 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a fresh-made moon xxx over the mountain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx even while digging a garden xxx oils gushes out 
xxxxxx from the mist xxx stinging insects xxx emerge 
xxxxxx today too xxx spent stuffing my face... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx earthen bridge, xxx i stand pissing xxx in morning mist 
xxxxxx planting vegetables xxx living in mist... xxx little house 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx paper fan spread wide xxx he sleeps 
xxxxxx in heat shimmers xxx "give back my child!" xxx a sparrow sings 
xxxxxx "give back my child!" xxx mother sparrow chases xxx the cat 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx at the fox's hole xxx red beans and rice 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx in the threshold crushing xxx hair lice 
xxxxxx a cat in heat shimmers xxx also follows xxx the god of wandering 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx even horse dung xxx becomes money 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx coins, offered branches xxx heat shimmers 
xxxxxx morning and night xxx bullied about... xxx leftover snow 
xxxxxx the last snow pile, xxx even the sparrows xxx make fun of it 
xxxxxx such is life, xxx the gate's snow is forced xxx to melt 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx the poverty-hiding snow xxx melts away 
xxxxxx my gate, xxx the neighborhood's xxx snow dump 
xxxxxx my snow too xxx entrusted to join xxx chikuma river 
xxxxxx buddha's death-day, xxx gently blowing pinks xxx and maiden flowers 
xxxxxx the face of buddha xxx on his death-day xxx watching the coins 
xxxxxx spring blossoms, xxx even in a farmhouse xxx amida buddha on display 
xxxxxx even the candy stand xxx decked with flowers... xxx the founder's image 
xxxxxx the festive jelly xxx is prayed to too... xxx the founder's image 
xxxxxx founder's image on display, xxx even the thief cat xxx in blossom shade 
xxxxxx well, well xxx his face looks sixty... xxx the laid-off servant 
xxxxxx one migrating servant xxx rides a palanquin... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx a laid-off servant at market, xxx his fifty year-old face xxx exposed 
xxxxxx what do you think xxx of my leaking roof? xxx doll festival dolls 
xxxxxx closing her eyes xxx to the scattering blossoms... xxx the doll 
xxxxxx clay dolls too xxx are gathering today... xxx festival 
xxxxxx my world, xxx those herbs over yonder xxx become my cake 
xxxxxx herb cakes, xxx inside the mixing tub xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx in a pine tree xxx umbrella-hats in a row... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx the child on her back xxx beats time with a flower... xxx tea-picking song 
xxxxxx grumbling his praise xxx to amida buddha... xxx tea picker 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx a woman, also xxx digs with a plow 
xxxxxx the love-crazed cat xxx listens xxx to my scolding 
xxxxxx love-struck cat, xxx down into wolf valley xxx he goes 
xxxxxx they stop sniffing xxx and go their separate ways... xxx lover cats 
xxxxxx love-smitten xxx my cat becomes xxx the neighbor's pet 
xxxxxx because of love xxx they call him xxx "thieving cat!" 
xxxxxx a grain of rice xxx stuck to his nose... xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx while at my window xxx a yowl... xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx living in harmony xxx how many generations? xxx sparrows in the eaves 
xxxxxx at my humble hut xxx he begs for a present xxx a baby sparrow 
xxxxxx my humble hut, xxx with baby sparrows xxx underfoot 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx so quickly you've learned xxx to eat and run 
xxxxxx in the hand xxx tossing coins, baby sparrow xxx starts cheeping 
xxxxxx chirping for the rice xxx on my cheek... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx behind the house, xxx this nightingale xxx these cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx his rain-drenched xxx morning voice 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx this voice for this xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx not neglecting even a house xxx without blossoms 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx how many hundreds of songs xxx before you eat? 
xxxxxx keeping a steady eye xxx on the quarrel... xxx the swallow 
xxxxxx no definite place xxx to spend the night... xxx evening swallow 
xxxxxx kyoto, kyoto! xxx on kyoto's fifth avenue... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx swallows watch the people xxx come and go... xxx deep wooded mountains 
xxxxxx hey swallows! xxx for my thin, rising smoke xxx congratulate me first 
xxxxxx a good world! good world! xxx country swallows xxx and town swallows 
xxxxxx from great hell xxx and from little hell, xxx skylarks 
xxxxxx sticking to the thicket xxx where she left her children... xxx skylark 
xxxxxx in the hell painting xxx perched on a fence... xxx a lark sings 
xxxxxx gamblers in the field xxx scatter below... xxx a lark sings 
xxxxxx under the cover xxx of morning's haze xxx geese taking off 
xxxxxx rice field geese xxx if you stay too long xxx danger! danger! 
xxxxxx behind the fisherman's neck xxx departing xxx geese 
xxxxxx wherever you like xxx lead me along... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx our praising buddha xxx is a nuisance! the geese xxx depart 
xxxxxx safe in holy xxx jizo's hand, squats xxx a frog 
xxxxxx hitching a ride xxx on mr. turtle... xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx raising a cheer xxx for the torches... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx bathing in the fallen xxx plum blossoms... xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx sitting in a row xxx peace on earth... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx squatting like he's vomiting xxx a man! xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx giving birth xxx with that belly? xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx celebratory smoke xxx rising, the croaking xxx frogs 
xxxxxx the dog and the butterfly xxx not strangers xxx at all 
xxxxxx on the way to bed xxx the butterfly visits xxx the mouse's rice 
xxxxxx crossing the hanging bridge xxx on foot... xxx butterfly 
xxxxxx playing with xxx the rambunctious dog... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx "follow me to zenko temple!" xxx a butterfly xxx flits 
xxxxxx borrowing an antler xxx the little butterfly xxx rests 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx even in grassy shade xxx a hot bath's ready 
xxxxxx the flute-playing servant xxx is the village headman! xxx butterflies dance 
xxxxxx for your dancing fee xxx i let fly this piece of paper... xxx meadow butterfly 
xxxxxx in a thicket, too xxx around the buddha... xxx butterflies dance 
xxxxxx you too xxx are viewing the blossoms... xxx lice! 
xxxxxx a skinny louse xxx born into the realm xxx of blossoms 
xxxxxx the trout too xxx hit their peak young... xxx yoshino river 
xxxxxx a lot of fleeing xxx a lot of playing... xxx little trout 
xxxxxx seizing xxx the flowering mustard... xxx mouse on tiptoe 
xxxxxx on the flowering mustard xxx plop! sits xxx the frog 
xxxxxx flowering mustard, xxx the sparrows play xxx with the mouse 
xxxxxx on flowering mustard xxx sitting so lightly... xxx a mouse 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx atop the stems xxx of flowering mustard 
xxxxxx lying on her back xxx sucking on the dangling xxx wisteria 
xxxxxx land of vegetables, xxx a teahouse with blooming xxx wisteria 
xxxxxx creeping through xxx wisteria trellises... xxx oji highway 
xxxxxx from a wisteria trellis xxx nook i see... xxx great edo 
xxxxxx wisteria blossoms xxx "praise ah... ah...!" xxx they rustle 
xxxxxx the plum tree at my gate xxx though reluctantly xxx has bloomed! 
xxxxxx among red plum blossoms xxx drying from its bath xxx a cat 
xxxxxx the moon shines xxx before the dinner tray... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx peacefully xxx the plum blossoms spread... xxx countryside 
xxxxxx even my plum tree xxx in its own sweet time xxx has bloomed! 
xxxxxx the wolf that followed me xxx howls... xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx day after day xxx more and more poop... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx even for a poor "praise buddha!" xxx a shower of coins 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx since the day xxx amida became buddha 
xxxxxx scattering blossoms, xxx money is collected xxx buddha on display 
xxxxxx even popeyed emma xxx hell's judge, gawks... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx parents stick them xxx in their umbrella-hats... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx my gate's cherry tree xxx flits and flutters... xxx hole in the fence 
xxxxxx relishing the falling xxx cherry blossoms... xxx puppies 
xxxxxx from japan's xxx front door on... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx a hot bath xxx a prayer xxx then cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx yoshino hill, xxx not a single cherry blossom xxx with a flaw 
xxxxxx vacant temple, xxx cherry trees blooming xxx industriously 
xxxxxx vacant temple, xxx industriously blooming xxx peach and cherry 
xxxxxx becoming snakes xxx practicing their wriggle... xxx branches of willow 
xxxxxx he'll soon find out, xxx he who says xxx "nights are short!" 
xxxxxx the short summer night xxx filled with courtiers... xxx mountain 
xxxxxx "what a short summer night!" xxx the nettle tree xxx scolds 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx under a tree, on a stone xxx priests 
xxxxxx fear not! xxx if you sleep in the field xxx night is short 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the hot night... xxx gargoyle 
xxxxxx a pigeon pacing xxx at the edge of bamboo... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx a butterbur leaf xxx pops open a hole... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx he yawns in the hot xxx healing bath 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx meandering xxx arrives 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx through my neighbor's pine xxx just a remnant 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx through my neighbor's bamboo xxx just a remnant 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx on the cloud's outskirts xxx a little village 
xxxxxx the so-called xxx "cool evenings" of summer... xxx soon to be over 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even in my soup xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even in my soup xxx the harvest moon 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx for the great lord's xxx gatekeeper 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx bath steam and rice field xxx stirring 
xxxxxx this cool air comes xxx from amida buddha's xxx direction! 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx visiting ueno hill xxx wears me out 
xxxxxx swift-footed it flees, xxx cloudburst! xxx cloudburst! 
xxxxxx soup bucket, xxx the summer cloudburst xxx has passed 
xxxxxx for the soup bucket xxx a single cloudburst... xxx too much! 
xxxxxx watching the downpour xxx under a temple xxx bell 
xxxxxx the cloudburst xxx scrubs it clean... xxx the old house 
xxxxxx the cloudburst xxx and lord kaga xxx splishing, splashing! 
xxxxxx even the cloudburst xxx shows the facing mountain xxx favoritism 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx two drops for the rice cake tub xxx three drops for the winnow 
xxxxxx my lovemaking, xxx mount tsukuba's clouds xxx bursting! 
xxxxxx green hedge, xxx a frog cheers xxx the billowing clouds 
xxxxxx today again xxx they're putting on a show... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx billowing clouds, xxx toward the big drums xxx bring your rain 
xxxxxx like little dots xxx little billows in a row... xxx little clouds 
xxxxxx toward my line of sight xxx standing in a row... xxx cloud billows 
xxxxxx wind on the greenery, xxx a row of shrubs xxx for sale 
xxxxxx arms and legs spread wide xxx straddling xxx pure water 
xxxxxx from the shade xxx of the poison plant... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx from my walking stick's hole xxx pure water gushes 
xxxxxx your rice field xxx my rice field xxx the same green 
xxxxxx looking again xxx looking again... xxx someone else's green field 
xxxxxx the baby sparrow xxx splish-splash bathes... xxx in buddha's tea 
xxxxxx on a little shrine xxx rustling with the azaleas... xxx rice dumplings 
xxxxxx medicine xxx for the nightingale's voice? xxx this morning's rain 
xxxxxx in my new summer robe xxx tucked in the sleeve... xxx tofu 
xxxxxx even the servant xxx poses like a saint... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx growing weary xxx of the diet... xxx my new summer robe 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx even a dog won't sniff xxx my summer kimono 
xxxxxx summer kimono, xxx a present for my bride xxx in shinano 
xxxxxx summer kimono, xxx the rain kindly xxx washes it 
xxxxxx tomorrow's wind xxx blows tomorrow... xxx in my mosquito net, alone 
xxxxxx osaka, xxx on the back of an ox xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx in the darkness xxx swishing, swishing... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx softly snoring, xxx the cat curled up xxx on the fan 
xxxxxx after getting it xxx it's dropped so soon... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx at my hut xxx with tobacco, smoking out xxx the mosquitoes 
xxxxxx airing out the bedding xxx and xxx the cat 
xxxxxx the fish in the tub xxx won't know tomorrow... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx the fish xxx unaware of the bucket... xxx a cool evening 
xxxxxx saying my apology xxx to the sacred tree... xxx a cool breeze 
xxxxxx on the ground xxx we stick and sit... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a wifeless man xxx makes his plants bloom... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a farting contest xxx under the moonflower trellis... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx with a kitchen knife xxx choosing eels... xxx a cool evening 
xxxxxx massaging my back xxx with the pine tree's gnarl... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx with my feet counting xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the cool night... xxx gargoyle 
xxxxxx my rice field too xxx song by song xxx is planted 
xxxxxx rice-planting song, xxx let everyone's anger xxx be cured! 
xxxxxx in the thicket shade xxx all alone... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx for eight pennies xxx the whole family celebrates... xxx summer ice! 
xxxxxx early rising xxx is medicine, they say! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx also behind me xxx returning from nikko shrine... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx entering edo xxx without fear or qualm... xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx scolded by old sokan xxx never again... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx taking credit xxx for glorious nikko... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx taking credit xxx for the cool breeze... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx how was the festival xxx up at nikko... xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx from the tip xxx of hitomaro's brush... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx "that's a poor excuse xxx for rain!" xxx sings the cuckoo 
xxxxxx scolding the poor xxx rain as well... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx a butterbur leaf xxx on his head, listen: xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx the cuckoo hurls threats xxx at the horse xxx passing by 
xxxxxx night work xxx on countless islands... xxx cuckoos 
xxxxxx lighting my pipe xxx with a candle... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx kakizaki, xxx with a stammering song xxx the mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx the mountain cuckoo sings xxx at mr. toad's xxx funeral 
xxxxxx down in the shadows xxx lurks the ants' hell... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx the house's former tenant xxx kindly left... xxx the mountain cuckoo! 
xxxxxx help yourself to the lice xxx in my thatched hut! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you standing guard xxx like o-take buddha? xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx deigning to guard xxx my house... xxx the mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx swarming 'round xxx the boat-hauler's legs... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx sprinkled on xxx the raftsman's rice... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx clinging to xxx the raftsman's chopstick... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx my child strikes xxx a sulky pose xxx calling fireflies 
xxxxxx sweeping them off xxx the cow's back... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx the puppy comes out xxx and calls them too... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx the puppy also xxx comes out... xxx calling fireflies 
xxxxxx my firefly guest xxx do you disdain xxx my hut? 
xxxxxx get ready to see xxx my piss waterfall... xxx come, firefly! 
xxxxxx tripping xxx on the wrinkles of my hand... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx out! fireflies xxx i'm locking up... xxx out! fireflies 
xxxxxx the first firefly xxx to buddha's lap xxx has fled 
xxxxxx visiting my chest xxx on its way... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx in an old bucket xxx rice plants rustle xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx firefly's light, xxx flitting through my hut xxx forms a cross 
xxxxxx guiding the way xxx to firefly-viewing... xxx the hut's dog 
xxxxxx hey firefly xxx sneak a peek behind her! xxx goddess kannon 
xxxxxx my home xxx a bit too cramped... xxx departing firefly 
xxxxxx my home, xxx surveying its flaws xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx mosquito larvae too xxx keep the sutra's xxx rhythm 
xxxxxx swatting a fly xxx on buddha's holy xxx head 
xxxxxx while i'm away xxx enjoy your lovemaking xxx hut's flies 
xxxxxx after plastering xxx the gate with fleas xxx the dog runs off 
xxxxxx the kitten rubs xxx her fleas xxx on the nettle tree 
xxxxxx from the pale red flower xxx a cicada xxx is born! 
xxxxxx mute cicada, xxx he, too, perfectly xxx at peace 
xxxxxx little monk, xxx deep in his sleeve xxx singing, a cicada 
xxxxxx drenched xxx by a rain shower xxx the cicada's voice 
xxxxxx sumiyoshi, xxx growing up together xxx the cicadas sing 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx growing up together xxx the cicadas sing 
xxxxxx cicadas singing xxx it's a contagious xxx disease 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx in the soon-to-be cut xxx pine tree 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx cocoons are drying up xxx drying up 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx then flies in a flash xxx up my sleeve 
xxxxxx temple mountain, xxx buzzing into my sleeve xxx a cicada 
xxxxxx first cicada xxx are you singing for him? xxx buddha's temple 
xxxxxx cicada in the pine xxx listening to the sutra xxx is born 
xxxxxx a face xxx like everyone else's... xxx the snail 
xxxxxx the brushwood door's xxx substitute lock... xxx a snail 
xxxxxx tell passers-by xxx my door lock's broken! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx does the cloudburst xxx make you happy? xxx snail 
xxxxxx does the red dawn xxx delight you xxx snail? 
xxxxxx while praising the cool breeze xxx leeches xxx dropped 
xxxxxx speaking xxx this day's deepest thoughts... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx words xxx are a waste of time... xxx poppies 
xxxxxx this world xxx bristles with thorns... xxx yet there are lotuses 
xxxxxx leftover rice plants, xxx even the horse xxx won't gobble them 
xxxxxx leftover rice plants, xxx even the horse xxx won't trample them 
xxxxxx over me xxx soon enough you'll bloom xxx moss blossoms 
xxxxxx in this world's wind xxx they thin out quick... xxx bamboo shoots 
xxxxxx one by one xxx the tall bamboo shoots xxx bending 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx big brothers, little brothers xxx swish, swish! 
xxxxxx blind luck, xxx bamboo shoots sprout xxx where they sprout 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots sprout xxx some are lucky xxx some are not 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx a creek serves xxx as my melon cooler 
xxxxxx the temple guard xxx sells tea cakes... xxx grove of summer trees 
xxxxxx even on the grafted willow xxx so quick! xxx thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx no lazing at the gate xxx they husk barley... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx the temple guard xxx sells tea cakes... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx first, a deutzia blossom xxx for his hair... xxx temple actor 
xxxxxx in deutzia blossoms xxx a hatchling peeks out... xxx mountain 
xxxxxx feeling for the stone bridge xxx with my feet... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx from mr. wolf xxx to mr. watchman... xxx night's cold 
xxxxxx i'm forced to play xxx the flute... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx by the next room's lamplight xxx eating my rice... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx old habit, xxx the cold nights of kiso xxx on my knees 
xxxxxx my knees xxx this cold night in the mountains xxx feel older 
xxxxxx a flute plays, xxx suddenly night's coldness xxx begins 
xxxxxx feeling for parched beans xxx with my feet... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx those who call me "starling" xxx raise a ruckus... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx vain mankind xxx feeling like carousing... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx walking off xxx a bellyful of rice cakes... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx moving from back to front xxx night's coldness 
xxxxxx the little monkey xxx chews on a pipe... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx sleeping mat, xxx blowing pipe smoke xxx at the milky way 
xxxxxx consider this rubbish heap xxx a mountain... xxx autumn moon 
xxxxxx scolding xxx vain man... xxx the autumn moon 
xxxxxx hole in the wall, xxx my harvest moon xxx comes in 
xxxxxx looking pretty xxx in a hole in the paper door... xxx heaven's river 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx and looking west xxx zenko temple! 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx even islands without pines xxx add to the head-count 
xxxxxx broken wall, xxx my harvest moon's xxx grand entrance 
xxxxxx though the autumn wind blows, xxx still xxx lazy 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx also behind me xxx mount usori 
xxxxxx vain mankind! xxx even in blossoming kyoto xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx setting the silkworm xxx moth adrift... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx sloppy, yes xxx but the dewdrops are pearls! xxx pearls! 
xxxxxx "dewdrops here!" xxx the coaxing voice xxx of a mountain crow 
xxxxxx to which side xxx of the silver dew? xxx the crow's summons 
xxxxxx become pearls xxx great big pearls! xxx morning dew 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx the astonished face xxx of the dog 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx running like hell xxx to zenko temple 
xxxxxx my dog xxx turns a somersault... xxx field of flowers 
xxxxxx horse-shaped melon, xxx "gimme! gimme!" cries xxx the crying child 
xxxxxx "gimme that moon!" xxx cries the crying xxx child 
xxxxxx the child on her back xxx reaches to touch... xxx bell for the ancestors 
xxxxxx a cricket rides xxx unsteadily... xxx horse-shaped eggplant 
xxxxxx she tells her age xxx spreading five fingers... xxx memorial for the dead 
xxxxxx realizing it's being hit xxx just for fun... xxx bell for the ancestors 
xxxxxx even the sparrows xxx partake... xxx bon festival rice 
xxxxxx served on a lotus leaf xxx a lonely sight... xxx bon festival rice 
xxxxxx lit by a bonfire xxx for the dead... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx in the cool air xxx visiting graves 
xxxxxx night of dancing xxx bon festival, just today xxx and tomorrow 
xxxxxx awaiting the stars, xxx does the grown man xxx feel young again? 
xxxxxx veiling the face xxx of the bride star... xxx nettle tree 
xxxxxx chopsticks of green xxx plume grass, uneven... xxx festival 
xxxxxx for one day xxx it's a famous resort... xxx plume grass barn 
xxxxxx wild boar xxx spend a night! xxx thatched hunter's hut 
xxxxxx from plume grass xxx has it arisen? xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx building a hunter's hut, xxx in the thatch a katydid xxx sings 
xxxxxx looking trendy xxx with four corners... xxx thatched hunter's hut 
xxxxxx throughout shinano xxx on every mount suwa... xxx evening dew 
xxxxxx just the sight xxx of plume grass chopsticks... xxx cool air! 
xxxxxx paying no heed xxx to suwa shrine's wind... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx uneven chopsticks xxx of plume grass too... xxx celebrate the festival 
xxxxxx from the tiny thatched xxx hunter's hut, first... xxx a rustling 
xxxxxx the first plume grass xxx has called it forth... xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx flowering plume grass xxx even shaped as a hunter's hut... xxx is inviting 
xxxxxx with thatched hunter's huts xxx mount fuji xxx in a good mood 
xxxxxx in kamakura xxx one for the dog... xxx sacred rice cakes 
xxxxxx the monk's rough clothes xxx pounded xxx with a purpose 
xxxxxx evening cloth-pounding, xxx my wife's tea cakes xxx are huge! 
xxxxxx life in the mountains, xxx even priests xxx pound cloth in the evening 
xxxxxx at my hut too xxx a stone for pounding xxx cloth 
xxxxxx wild goose without companions xxx come! come! xxx to shelter 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx my rice field too xxx is five or six feet! 
xxxxxx begging at my gate xxx the geese lose xxx weight 
xxxxxx the black, the green, xxx the brown... xxx insect chorus 
xxxxxx insects sing, fly xxx here and there... xxx "just for us" 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx there! and there! xxx stars appear 
xxxxxx resting xxx on the big dog's head xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the cricket xxx makes his bedroom... xxx horse dung 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx has given his cage xxx the slip 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx on the mountain of millet xxx katydid 
xxxxxx my humble hut, xxx it's turned tea-brown xxx the katydid 
xxxxxx the praying mantis xxx hangs by one hand... xxx temple bell 
xxxxxx foolish wildflower xxx without a trace xxx of bitterness 
xxxxxx in the gateway xxx it struggled but bloomed... xxx wildflower 
xxxxxx my chrysanthemum xxx doesn't care about looks xxx or style 
xxxxxx in the morning-glories xxx peeking out... xxx mouse 
xxxxxx sleeping mat, xxx pipe smoke wafts over xxx the maiden flowers 
xxxxxx in my home village xxx they're used to poverty... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx blooming bush clover, xxx hiding from the child xxx a deer's face 
xxxxxx beckoning xxx the rain shower to strike... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx sticking to xxx the young buck's butt... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx persimmon leaves xxx turn buddha-colored... xxx then fall 
xxxxxx my province, xxx for the buddha of the thicket xxx first cotton boll 
xxxxxx at my gate the cat xxx batting chestnuts! xxx chestnuts! 
xxxxxx first winter month xxx tenth day... xxx sleeping late 
xxxxxx first winter month, xxx from behind senso temple xxx i pray 
xxxxxx sleeping in a ball xxx on a winter's night... xxx my little nook 
xxxxxx back door, xxx pissing scribbles xxx in the first ice 
xxxxxx the lucky mouse xxx crosses then goes back... xxx first ice 
xxxxxx the nightingale's sleeping place xxx revealed... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx the god kompira's xxx fluttering voice... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx the god kompira's xxx banner fluttering... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx an old man's xxx clogs clacking too... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx cold moon, xxx the wild geese also pray xxx to kompira 
xxxxxx my tea-boiled rice xxx puffing steam... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx the leaves of the xxx porcelain cedar tremble... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx the puppy begs xxx for a present... xxx evening's winter rain 
xxxxxx the woodpecker's effort xxx is wasted... xxx a night of winter rain 
xxxxxx making the blooming xxx cockscomb droop... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain falls xxx on kamakura's residents... xxx geeses, gulls 
xxxxxx come in, winter rain, xxx from the corner two doors down xxx my hut 
xxxxxx mount uzu xxx facing the winter wind xxx drinks it in 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx he shoulders a musket xxx and a short sword 
xxxxxx mud-dumplings, xxx today too, winter wind! xxx winter wind! 
xxxxxx just for me xxx a storm, winter wind xxx and hail 
xxxxxx these thin legs, xxx winter storm winds xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx the backstreet xxx is the dog's toilet xxx first snowfall 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx over the dog's toilet too xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx first one of the year xxx thin as can be... xxx my snow 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx he shouts in the middle xxx of pissing 
xxxxxx with her samisen xxx she makes snow fall... xxx second floor 
xxxxxx blossoming kyoto xxx is it? xxx dirty snow 
xxxxxx let loose xxx by some god above... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx first frost on the grass xxx gets a dash... xxx sacred sake 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx a woman's voice xxx recites a prayer 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx flower sellers in a row xxx hitting their bells 
xxxxxx first frost, xxx the smiling face xxx of the tea master 
xxxxxx "frost has formed!" xxx he yells xxx then pisses 
xxxxxx a big rosary xxx 'round his neck... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx withered fields, xxx with rice bag on her head xxx she runs 
xxxxxx black kites reeling xxx reeling in the sky... xxx the gods depart 
xxxxxx morning moon, xxx the god of wealth's food pile xxx hides it 
xxxxxx god of wealth festival, xxx also going in, going out xxx rows of pigeons 
xxxxxx old quarter, xxx food for the god of wealth xxx in mist 
xxxxxx darkening dusk, xxx even in yonder thicket xxx a shinto dance 
xxxxxx shinto dance at night, xxx red leaves fall xxx into the bonfires 
xxxxxx come! come! xxx to my house, you off-beat xxx bowl-beater 
xxxxxx i unseal the new tea xxx celestial geese xxx hurry on 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx time to unseal xxx the new tea! 
xxxxxx praise basho! xxx i've found my padded xxx cotton vest 
xxxxxx "a dirty priest xxx in a red skullcap"... xxx he's called 
xxxxxx the farting contest xxx begins at once... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx guard over haiku xxx i beseech you! xxx snow buddha 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx even a lump of it xxx is buddha 
xxxxxx snow buddha, xxx my handprint too xxx is something to cherish 
xxxxxx sparrows gather xxx and cheer... xxx my snow buddha 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx it too xxx becomes buddha 
xxxxxx funny xxx the dog turns 'round... xxx snowball! 
xxxxxx above the hibachis xxx of the old quarter xxx day breaks 
xxxxxx another early morning xxx laugh! xxx my charcoal fire 
xxxxxx even the bag xxx the charcoal came in xxx burned tonight! 
xxxxxx darkened by smoke xxx from the charcoal kiln... xxx paper door 
xxxxxx even the charcoal kiln xxx invariably xxx has neighbors 
xxxxxx straight up, xxx the smoke of holy gohei's xxx charcoal kiln 
xxxxxx snap and crackle xxx goes the fire... xxx "all praise to amida buddha!" 
xxxxxx in tea blossoms xxx the nightingale's child's xxx singing lessons 
xxxxxx though it's smoky xxx don't leave my hut! xxx singing plover 
xxxxxx trampling my roof thatch xxx to pieces... xxx plovers! 
xxxxxx trampling my house xxx to pieces, are you? xxx flock of plovers 
xxxxxx plovers on a winter night, xxx not an old voice xxx among them 
xxxxxx hoarse-voiced plover xxx get in tune xxx with the others! 
xxxxxx slowly, slowly xxx plover with burnt tail feathers xxx where to now? 
xxxxxx though out of tune xxx they're suma beach's plovers! xxx plovers! 
xxxxxx even in yoshiwara xxx in a one-ply wall xxx plovers in the night 
xxxxxx he looks like someone xxx i know! pufferfish's xxx bloated face 
xxxxxx the blooming cockscomb xxx dies xxx standing up 
xxxxxx the blooming cockscomb xxx dies standing up... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx no shame for you xxx red chrysanthemum! xxx another winter rain 
xxxxxx for the money-making xxx chrysanthemum, too... xxx the same withering 
xxxxxx among the withered xxx chrysanthemums... xxx brazen sparrows 
xxxxxx fallen leaves, xxx a chrysanthemum blooms xxx wretchedly 
xxxxxx grassy thicket, xxx what karma lets xxx the chrysanthemum survive? 
xxxxxx the plume grass xxx that hides the lovers... xxx withers 
xxxxxx windblown leaves xxx good job, cat! xxx pushing them 
xxxxxx the wind has brought xxx enough to build a fire... xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx the kitten catches one xxx for a second... xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx even for me xxx there's a guardian god! xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx this body of dust xxx softly, softly... xxx blossoming spring 
xxxxxx at my house xxx born with ease... xxx spring blossoms 
xxxxxx new year's decorations, xxx the night i burn them xxx i cheer 
xxxxxx snow falls xxx on the celebration... xxx new year's bonfire 
xxxxxx they make a pitiful fire... xxx my new year's xxx decorations 
xxxxxx for the celebration xxx of little pines xxx the day stretches longer 
xxxxxx tied to the monkey's xxx back... xxx string of the kite 
xxxxxx even the kite xxx of the provincial lord xxx is bad-mouthed 
xxxxxx a kite rises xxx slow and easy... xxx a little village 
xxxxxx hugging his kite xxx he sleeps xxx deep and calm 
xxxxxx in one sky, xxx grand imperial kites xxx and little kites 
xxxxxx a wastepaper kite xxx next to that of maeda xxx lord kaga! 
xxxxxx before the gate xxx the kite-snagging nettle tree... xxx a thousand ages old! 
xxxxxx dancing monkey, xxx its face also xxx isn't weary 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx they also aren't tired xxx of blooming 
xxxxxx in my province xxx even trained monkeys xxx wear noble hats 
xxxxxx in my province xxx even trained monkeys xxx offer prayers! 
xxxxxx melting to the tune xxx of the new year's singer... xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx the way things are, xxx in my do-nothing house xxx the day is long 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx even the long day xxx brings tears 
xxxxxx in the long day xxx scribbling on a wall... xxx eyes, nose 
xxxxxx in the long day xxx at my cane's tip... xxx a fuse cord 
xxxxxx the day is long! xxx long! in this vain xxx world today 
xxxxxx in this vain life xxx a sheer waste... xxx the long day 
xxxxxx from the tip xxx of the forest ranger's broom... xxx spring departs 
xxxxxx forest ranger, xxx he sweeps away spring xxx with a broom 
xxxxxx over the just-spread xxx sawdust... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx spring snow, xxx on fresh-laid reeds xxx it falls 
xxxxxx spring snow, xxx not a single face xxx without a fan 
xxxxxx the first blessing xxx for plow and hoe... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx the cat washes in the river... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx he catches my yawn xxx dog at the gate 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx her sleeves rustle over xxx mount matchi 
xxxxxx spring wind, xxx the writing brush rolls away xxx in the field 
xxxxxx the thief xxx is just as he is... xxx hazy moon 
xxxxxx the temple teatime's xxx second call of the clapper... xxx morning mist 
xxxxxx vanishing xxx in the heat shimmers... xxx my humble hut 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx shaped like a cross xxx the leftover snow 
xxxxxx young folk, xxx even melting snow xxx is fun, no? 
xxxxxx rice seedlings, xxx a little family watches xxx the evening rain 
xxxxxx rice-seedling beds xxx with no unevenness... xxx can't be found 
xxxxxx herb cakes, xxx cherry blossoms sprinkled xxx on top 
xxxxxx my intrepid guide xxx on the low tide beach... xxx village dog 
xxxxxx wiping my feet xxx on pine needles... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx in the river fog xxx a boisterous noise... xxx tea-picking song 
xxxxxx led by a gang xxx of grannies... xxx the tea-picking song 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx with a shameless face xxx has returned 
xxxxxx while the gate's sparrow xxx watches xxx he snatches an egg 
xxxxxx he knows the meaning xxx of the breakfast bell... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx introducing their children xxx to society... xxx strutting sparrows 
xxxxxx faces looking like xxx they've been to zenko temple xxx baby sparrows 
xxxxxx do me a favor xxx baby sparrow... xxx pick at my lice 
xxxxxx my neighbor for a moment xxx the nightingale xxx moves on 
xxxxxx the nightingale watching xxx watching the gamblers... xxx sings 
xxxxxx nightingale's breakfast, xxx only for this xxx it sang 
xxxxxx the nightingale toils xxx at his singing... xxx before eating 
xxxxxx while the nightingale xxx looks askance... xxx they gamble 
xxxxxx to kitano xxx every morning, the nightingale's xxx pilgrimage 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx you still haven't lost xxx your kiso accent 
xxxxxx a nightingale arrives xxx unexpectedly... xxx gamblers 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even while pooping, sings xxx lotus sutra 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx if your throat gets dry xxx there's sumida river 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx on a branch, in her lap xxx a cat 
xxxxxx a box lunch xxx in a tree's crotch... xxx a nightingale sings 
xxxxxx no bigger than a sparrow xxx yet he warbles xxx the lotus sutra! 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx deep in the rain xxx a lark is singing 
xxxxxx the clam too xxx opens wide... xxx a lark is singing 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx while he poops entertained xxx by a lark 
xxxxxx sermon in the field, xxx the priest's wide-open mouth xxx a pheasant's voice 
xxxxxx a mountain pheasant xxx ruffling my sleeve xxx runs away 
xxxxxx departing geese, xxx how many times have you seen xxx mount asama's smoke? 
xxxxxx departing geese, xxx how many times have you seen xxx blossom-filled edo? 
xxxxxx goose, wild goose xxx when did your xxx journey begin? 
xxxxxx a goose without companions xxx plodding along xxx returns 
xxxxxx where and how xxx did you spend first month? xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx will one flock xxx stop at senju town? xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx mr. and mrs. goose xxx talking as they go... xxx they go! 
xxxxxx learning to praise buddha xxx at mokubo temple... xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx finalizing the divorce xxx leaving my house behind... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx yielding the seat of honor xxx to mr. turtle... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx he comes to visit xxx with such gravitas... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx sitting up straight xxx in their circle... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx the little buddha's head xxx a launch pad too... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx "this year the world is good!" xxx little frogs xxx big frogs 
xxxxxx like saigyo xxx squatting, croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx copying the nagging xxx in the thatched house... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx despite the scolding xxx composed and shameless... xxx frog 
xxxxxx taking up the holy man's xxx chant... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx taking a leak xxx he keeps on croaking... xxx frog 
xxxxxx one by one xxx they take their seats... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx in the divine presence xxx of sumiyoshi's gods... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx with one voice xxx their mouths open wide... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx praising buddha xxx mouths gaping wide... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx running away xxx grumbling, mumbling... xxx evening frog 
xxxxxx chasing a lady xxx who gets away... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx blossom-viewing mat, xxx squatting at its front xxx a frog 
xxxxxx scrawny frog, hang tough! xxx issa xxx is here 
xxxxxx scrawny frog, fight on! xxx issa xxx to the rescue 
xxxxxx yellow rose, xxx "let me go first!" xxx jumping frog 
xxxxxx old pond, xxx a frog-jumping-into-water xxx sound 
xxxxxx in evening's glow xxx they glow... xxx frogs croaking 
xxxxxx in my hut xxx on urgent business... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx a frog has come xxx on urgent business 
xxxxxx entering my gate xxx unknowingly xxx a frog 
xxxxxx his hands hanging xxx in mount fuji's evening xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx all day teasing xxx the horse's ear... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx gate's garden, xxx when the crow scolds xxx the little butterfly leaves 
xxxxxx on a mat by the gate xxx i'm the butterfly's xxx roadblock 
xxxxxx miffed by the coin xxx tossed out the window... xxx little butterfly leaves 
xxxxxx brimming with hope xxx little butterflies... xxx a young couple 
xxxxxx flitting butterfly, xxx thus is buddha's law xxx in this world 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx hot tea, hot water xxx and sake for sale 
xxxxxx stop, butterfly xxx once more, stop! xxx on the festival rice cake 
xxxxxx stop, butterfly xxx once more, stop! xxx on the sake cup 
xxxxxx to the kitten's xxx death anniversary it flits... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx two by two xxx spring's first butterflies xxx arrive 
xxxxxx spring's first butterflies, xxx three couples! xxx five couples! 
xxxxxx licking the lap-baby's xxx cheek... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx "come this way, this way xxx blind man!" xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx hey butterfly xxx move aside! xxx bath water's splashing 
xxxxxx counting heads xxx in a hot tub... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx life in the world, xxx even butterflies from morning on xxx must toil! 
xxxxxx in the pigeon's thicket xxx on the sparrow's fence... xxx clamshells 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx day after day more xxx baby grass 
xxxxxx my umbrella-hat xxx left on the baby grass... xxx a hot bath 
xxxxxx little mustard flowers xxx what devil xxx plucked so many? 
xxxxxx in the middle xxx of flowering mustard xxx mount asama's smoke 
xxxxxx mustard flowers xxx in the thicket, hushed xxx have bloomed 
xxxxxx an eel shop eel xxx is escaping... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum tree, xxx under blossoms' shine xxx an evening prayer 
xxxxxx plum tree... xxx under the illuminated blossoms xxx the evening prayer 
xxxxxx betting seashells xxx gamblers in a frenzy... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx fussing, fussing xxx in the blossom shade... xxx gamblers 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx three hundred shops xxx under the plum blossoms 
xxxxxx gate's plum tree, xxx the family's good fortune xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx lord monkey chews xxx on a pipe... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the little monkey xxx chews on a pipe... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx don't throw xxx those offering coins! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx sparrows spill their food, xxx plum trees xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx tsurayuki's plum blossoms! xxx attached xxx to a sickle moon 
xxxxxx sir toad xxx on a secret mission... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx sickle moon, xxx i glide from plum blossoms xxx to buddha's image 
xxxxxx just for me... xxx the great moon! xxx the plum blossom scent! 
xxxxxx scattering cherry blossoms xxx please pardon xxx my pipe! 
xxxxxx a fistful of fallen xxx cherry blossoms too... xxx gamblers' pot 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx a floating world of pleasure xxx has begun 
xxxxxx going about xxx in cherry blossom light... xxx pure land priest 
xxxxxx a nuisance, xxx mountain cherry blossom xxx rumors fly 
xxxxxx even around here xxx paltry cherry trees... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx even in the capital xxx such a miserable xxx cherry tree 
xxxxxx fried rice emerges xxx from my pouch... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx a child pissing xxx "look! look!" xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx it's new year's day xxx to these old eyes... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx praise buddha! xxx sleeping in the light xxx of cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx it's gambling money xxx here in japan... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx a vegetable hodgepodge xxx on butterbur leaves... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx in a world for the old xxx peach boy too, emerge! xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx a peach blossom xxx in the horse's mouth 
xxxxxx gracing the gate xxx of a non-drinker too... xxx a greening willow 
xxxxxx giving the big dog xxx a tickle... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx at the cemetery guard's xxx gate too... xxx a green willow rustles 
xxxxxx pipe in my mouth, xxx smoking's allowed here xxx by my gate's willow 
xxxxxx mutual aid xxx for ruined house and hut... xxx willow 
xxxxxx drooping willow, xxx the gate's crookedness xxx not quite hidden 
xxxxxx my rice field xxx the greatest sight of all! xxx summer's early dawn 
xxxxxx in the short night xxx the dew works fast... xxx blades of grass 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx the serene and still xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx a hot night's pilgrimage xxx with song... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx in a big house's xxx big raindrops from the eaves... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx "ah cool air! cool air!" xxx even while saying this xxx i'm alone 
xxxxxx tied to the tree xxx where cool wind blows xxx my child 
xxxxxx in cool air xxx "what a good tumble!" xxx i cheer 
xxxxxx in the evening cool xxx no village xxx of outcastes 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx is rain coming from xxx buddha's direction? 
xxxxxx the planted azaleas xxx in full glory... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx proclaiming the fifth month xxx rain's first day... xxx a crow 
xxxxxx in the thicket shade xxx he sharpens his sickle... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx go, horsefly xxx through the ripped paper door! xxx fifth month rains are over 
xxxxxx leaving mount asama xxx coming this way... xxx little cloudburst 
xxxxxx with a light touch xxx morning's cloudburst... xxx teahouse 
xxxxxx distant storm, xxx each one of the watchers xxx has his opinion 
xxxxxx one house xxx in one summer rain... xxx dead center 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx the big lantern's xxx halo 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx an annoyed look xxx on the toad's face 
xxxxxx shining bright xxx one and all... xxx the billowing clouds 
xxxxxx big cloud, xxx though with lofty peaks xxx it creeps along 
xxxxxx one by one xxx they fall and crumble... xxx the peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx a suitable mountain xxx for me... xxx cloud without peaks 
xxxxxx cloud becomes a mountain xxx becomes xxx a cloud 
xxxxxx around the lamp xxx insects swarm... xxx wind on the greenery 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx to the left pure water xxx to the right the moon 
xxxxxx my humble hut's rice field xxx all alone... xxx so green 
xxxxxx wind wafts xxx rice field so green... xxx travelers in bathrobes 
xxxxxx the rice fields xxx greener and greener! xxx flute practice 
xxxxxx stopping for tea xxx by rice fields so green... xxx pilgrims to kyoto 
xxxxxx the world of dew xxx so fast turns green... xxx rice fields 
xxxxxx copy cat, xxx the hut's gate's rice field, too xxx is green 
xxxxxx a good wind, xxx beyond the green rice fields xxx northern mansion 
xxxxxx with high spirits xxx the kite ascends... xxx green rice fields 
xxxxxx on his finger xxx one penny... xxx buddha's birthday 
xxxxxx before the gate xxx an old man's homemade xxx birthday buddha 
xxxxxx the dog too xxx lies prostrate... xxx evening purification 
xxxxxx riding the plague god xxx the lice xxx float away 
xxxxxx eaves thatched with irises xxx then right away... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx the pony tries xxx to take a bite... xxx thatch of irises 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx here they pluck irises xxx for thatch 
xxxxxx my hut's xxx thatch of irises, even the cat xxx can reach it 
xxxxxx about ten decorate xxx the bamboo grass... xxx rice dumplings 
xxxxxx after a scolding xxx the weary cormorants xxx dive again 
xxxxxx the weary cormorant xxx turns back to her children xxx turns back... 
xxxxxx night moon, xxx while cormorants must work xxx sake in a teacup 
xxxxxx wiping and wiping his sweat xxx with his loincloth xxx as he talks 
xxxxxx at my hut xxx even the grass this summer xxx lost weight 
xxxxxx looking behind me xxx more young folk... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx like everyone else xxx i change from rags xxx to summer robe 
xxxxxx the child doesn't know xxx it's borrowed... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx just today xxx i wish i had neighbors... xxx my new summer robe 
xxxxxx rain falls xxx on the celebration... xxx the change to summer robes 
xxxxxx in a hand tub his fish xxx is allowed to play... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx outside my gate xxx a floating world of pleasure... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx how promising! xxx his summer kimono xxx already too short 
xxxxxx his first summer kimono, xxx hurry and grow xxx into a menace! 
xxxxxx i spot some bamboo xxx good for a walking stick... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx his first summer kimono, xxx hurry and grow xxx into a menace! 
xxxxxx looking jaunty xxx on the horse's ladle... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx my paper fan waving's xxx a bit overdone 
xxxxxx how quickly xxx the color fades... xxx red paper fan 
xxxxxx the big cat xxx flops down to sleep xxx on the fan 
xxxxxx hugging her knees xxx clutching her paper fan... xxx asleep 
xxxxxx helter-skelter xxx they flap and flap... xxx paper fans 
xxxxxx downwind xxx from the smudge pot smoke... xxx a buddha 
xxxxxx smudge pot smoke, xxx just three pennies' worth xxx does the house 
xxxxxx the blooming flower xxx suddenly shivers... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx the sound of fresh water xxx boiling... xxx deep in the well 
xxxxxx my hut's well, xxx i do its summer cleaning xxx by hand 
xxxxxx a quick inspection xxx of the well's bottom... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx deep in the well xxx a sound like farting... xxx the cleaner's voice 
xxxxxx since it's cool down there xxx take a little nap... xxx bottom of the well 
xxxxxx my child, my child xxx he tumbles so well! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx the beards of grasses xxx tickling me... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx the hanging worm xxx makes himself a raincoat... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx great temple gate, xxx in the cool air a monk xxx plucks grass 
xxxxxx cooling off standing xxx cooling lying down... xxx well, it's cool! 
xxxxxx knocking my pipe's ember xxx into my hand... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx foolish frog xxx don't talk nonsense! xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx making grass green xxx in a perfect circle... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx a grassy place for cooling off xxx already occupied 
xxxxxx every evening xxx there's a new shit road... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx naughty child xxx though tethered enjoys xxx evening's cool 
xxxxxx sardines served xxx in butterbur leaves... xxx planting rice 
xxxxxx at my hut too xxx a rice-planting rest... xxx comrades 
xxxxxx sumiyoshi, xxx even the rice-planting girls xxx are worshipped 
xxxxxx the little bat xxx chirps inside xxx the rice gourd 
xxxxxx the baby sparrow xxx chirps inside xxx the rice gourd 
xxxxxx good job! the bat xxx crawls out xxx the rice gourd 
xxxxxx putting an umbrella-hat xxx over the lantern... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx don't get indigestion xxx from the tofu dregs! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx i scatter tofu dregs too xxx for his feast... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the river porter xxx crossing with a swagger xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx well, well xxx out of the blue... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx scolding the poor xxx rain as well... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx "that's a poor excuse xxx for rain!" xxx sings the cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you scolding xxx that coin-tossing fellow? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx not despising xxx the tiny rice field... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx thinking i'm old xxx what a loud voice! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx "i'm off to that rubbish heap xxx edo! edo!" xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx rapping the bald xxx mountain's head... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx on the horse's back xxx "yee-haw!" xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't try acting xxx the innocent babe! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx little cuckoo xxx sing! sing! xxx issa is here 
xxxxxx cuckoo xxx what did you forget? xxx retracing steps 
xxxxxx looking at me xxx retracing his steps... xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx hey cuckoo, xxx don't look like you're sick xxx of the human race! 
xxxxxx on a vain mountain too, xxx move aside! move aside! xxx for sir cuckoo 
xxxxxx rising over the village xxx rice cooking smoke... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx it's a good grain barn xxx stand your ground! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx looking at me xxx retracing his steps... xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx cuckoo xxx what did you forget? xxx retracing steps 
xxxxxx buddha stands xxx drenched to the bone... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx thanks for nothing! xxx reed thrush racket 
xxxxxx big rain, xxx five hundred yards north xxx a moorhen's cry 
xxxxxx my rice field xxx is waterless... xxx a moorhen complains 
xxxxxx at my gate, xxx no moorhen crying xxx no farts 
xxxxxx from five hundred yards xxx or so it comes... xxx moorhen's cry 
xxxxxx flitting firefly, xxx don't get tangled xxx in women's hair! 
xxxxxx they shun xxx the priest... xxx flitting fireflies 
xxxxxx shunning xxx the mountain hermit... xxx flitting fireflies 
xxxxxx sleeping mats, xxx the fireflies counting xxx butts 
xxxxxx viewing fireflies xxx he takes a tumble... xxx "there's one!" 
xxxxxx lightly, nimbly xxx down the main road... xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx they pay their respects... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx do you think xxx my hair's a thicket? xxx firefly 
xxxxxx naughty child xxx though tethered calling xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx through the tears xxx though he's tethered xxx calling fireflies 
xxxxxx into the soup kettle xxx flitting, flitting xxx firefly 
xxxxxx a place xxx short on mosquito swarms... xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx mosquito swarm, xxx don't block my view xxx of the moon! 
xxxxxx the cool breeze xxx blows into the mouth... xxx a mosquito! 
xxxxxx my home, xxx for the mosquitoes xxx a famous resort 
xxxxxx while praising buddha xxx with wide-open mouth... xxx a mosquito 
xxxxxx the village mosquitoes' xxx great convocation... xxx moon on the eaves 
xxxxxx a celebration, xxx this year's mosquitoes too xxx feast 
xxxxxx my home xxx where i even exhale xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx the samurai is ordered xxx to shoo the flies... xxx sir horse 
xxxxxx chasing off flies xxx with a pestle... xxx grated yam soup 
xxxxxx swatting a fly xxx and a blooming xxx wildflower 
xxxxxx when i go out xxx they go out... xxx hut's flies 
xxxxxx not a good jumper xxx but a cuter flea xxx than the rest 
xxxxxx keep stone still xxx and look! a cicada xxx being born 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx rokugatsu village's xxx enten temple 
xxxxxx first cicada, xxx for a quick song sighted xxx on the post 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx in the mountains of course xxx leeches drop 
xxxxxx aware of the leeches xxx they enter... xxx marshy rice field 
xxxxxx from horseback xxx "so many! so many!" xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx even in mountain shade xxx a taste of edo... xxx first bonito 
xxxxxx summer's first bonito, xxx even at the mountain's edge xxx a taste of edo 
xxxxxx purification font, xxx swimming plum leaves xxx swimming trout 
xxxxxx a flood, xxx the tall dayflower keeps xxx her cool 
xxxxxx among dayflowers xxx an insect xxx "geecho! geecho!" 
xxxxxx two doors down xxx from the moonflowers... xxx my house 
xxxxxx wafting in xxx from the moonflowers... xxx the horse's fart 
xxxxxx moonflowers, xxx aimed at the horse's rump xxx one blooms 
xxxxxx the tea smoke xxx wafts its way... xxx unlucky peony 
xxxxxx the grime of a thousand xxx houses floats too... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx overhang, xxx perched on the lotus's stem xxx a beggar's hut 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx a rice field replaces xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx flies and horseflies xxx sport with them... xxx leftover rice plants 
xxxxxx the village child xxx sticks them on the dog... xxx rice plants 
xxxxxx the leftover rice plants xxx a bed xxx for the dog 
xxxxxx flanking the highway xxx on both sides... xxx leftover rice plants 
xxxxxx my child xxx in the barley field wind... xxx nicely plump 
xxxxxx the crossroads buddha xxx guards xxx one beard of barley 
xxxxxx under the eaves xxx one spear of barley xxx five, six feet 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx extending from my pillow xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx once on their feet xxx bamboo shoots, too xxx break 
xxxxxx spotting three shoots xxx of new bamboo... xxx the moonlit night 
xxxxxx quick-growing bamboo shoots, xxx the whole gang xxx the same 
xxxxxx cantaloupes, watermelons, xxx rock-a-bye xxx babies 
xxxxxx my cherry blossoms xxx even flush with fresh leaves xxx scatter 
xxxxxx they even sell tea xxx not worth a fart! xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx the nightingale's hermitage xxx too xxx in thick summer grasses 
xxxxxx in deep shade xxx purifying hand washing xxx hand washing 
xxxxxx deep shade, xxx the worm, too, shakes xxx making his raincoat 
xxxxxx deutzia blossom gate, xxx famous straw sandals xxx for sale 
xxxxxx even the thorn bush xxx is blooming! xxx blooming! 
xxxxxx a sandal vendor xxx at the window, morning's xxx cold beginning 
xxxxxx loud talk xxx about the cold night... xxx over the fence 
xxxxxx delightfully the beans xxx roll and tumble... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx going outside the fence xxx to fart... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx one by one xxx even the cats come home... xxx cold nights 
xxxxxx looking up, wrinkles xxx looking down, wrinkles... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx this is my life, xxx cold mornings xxx cold nights 
xxxxxx moon in the autumn dawn, xxx prayers from a window xxx at zenko temple 
xxxxxx the pony also xxx sets off on a journey... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx parentless xxx i only have my shadow... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx another year xxx i didn't die... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx next to the roof beam xxx shining bright... xxx harvest moon 
xxxxxx amazing, xxx in the house i was born xxx seeing this moon 
xxxxxx in harvest moonlight xxx keeping his cool... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx on a stone a teacup xxx filled with sake 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx in plume grass shadows xxx drinking sake 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx on the mountain scarecrow's xxx sleeve 
xxxxxx a wretched shame, xxx my heart xxx like the autumn sky 
xxxxxx like pebbles pounding xxx the eaves... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx in the autumn wind xxx clutching my sleeve... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx a cock-a-doodling rooster xxx on the roof 
xxxxxx loafing, xxx even in the blossom capital xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx every morning xxx enough for my tea kettle... xxx dew in the grass 
xxxxxx my ramshackle hut, xxx the dewdrops' great exertion xxx in vain 
xxxxxx from today on xxx to see is to pray... xxx dewdrops in the grass 
xxxxxx mountain mist xxx twining 'round my legs... xxx sunset 
xxxxxx cows moo moo moo xxx from the mist xxx emerge 
xxxxxx from the great bronze xxx buddha's nostrils xxx clouds of fog 
xxxxxx from the great bronze xxx buddha's nose fog... xxx softly, softly 
xxxxxx fall quickly, hide xxx my home village... xxx mist and cold rain 
xxxxxx mountain mist xxx just passing through... xxx big sitting room 
xxxxxx clear evening, xxx lined up in the pale blue xxx autumn mountains 
xxxxxx even the mountain village's xxx pissing place... xxx a field of flowers 
xxxxxx osaka, xxx bidding the tamed pony xxx farewell 
xxxxxx the pony neighs, xxx under a full moon xxx led away from his mother 
xxxxxx standing in a world xxx of tranquility... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx the dragonfly xxx settles to sleep... xxx on the scarecrow 
xxxxxx the farmer's lunch xxx dangles... xxx on the scarecrow 
xxxxxx accompanying xxx the cricket's song... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx evening cloth-pounding, xxx the cat that can't stand it xxx happy-go-lucky 
xxxxxx home village, xxx even in their sleep pounding xxx cloth 
xxxxxx don't cry, geese! xxx from now on xxx i'm a traveler too 
xxxxxx a pretty bird xxx passes in silence... xxx migrating 
xxxxxx again and again xxx my same companion... xxx migrating bird 
xxxxxx don't pass by xxx my crappy house too! xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow, xxx insects, too, do their night work xxx while singing 
xxxxxx lying belly-up xxx yet still singing... xxx autumn cicada 
xxxxxx swish swish xxx his body's husk... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the dragonfly goes about xxx his night work... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx holding fast xxx to the boulder... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx just a soot-colored xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx on my hut's post xxx gnawing away 
xxxxxx katydid's song xxx and my tinkling in the piss-pot xxx weaken in the night 
xxxxxx moving to live xxx in the rice box... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx dusted with flour xxx the katydid 
xxxxxx don't crush xxx the dewdrop pearls! xxx katydid 
xxxxxx turning over in bed, xxx move aside! xxx katydid 
xxxxxx crawling out xxx the wild dog's hole... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx entwined xxx by the maiden flower... xxx my wrinkled foot 
xxxxxx don't shake my house xxx down! xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx that fawn, xxx how old is it? xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx the mountain well xxx all clogged up... xxx bush clover blooms 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx enough buckwheat blooms xxx for one 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx buckwheat blooms xxx as good as the neighbors' 
xxxxxx my hut's rice field xxx somehow pulled it off... xxx harvest time 
xxxxxx this world today, xxx even plume grass xxx is blown in stripes 
xxxxxx regretfully i've joined them, xxx the mushy xxx persimmon eaters 
xxxxxx eating the astringent xxx persimmon, the crow xxx stepchild 
xxxxxx on the high branch xxx one astringent persimmon... xxx like old times 
xxxxxx in a world for the old xxx peach boy too, emerge! xxx hollow gourd 
xxxxxx big chestnuts, xxx the travelers stop xxx and gather 
xxxxxx with the boiled chestnuts xxx finished, so is xxx the conversation 
xxxxxx holy jizo, xxx for me, too, winter xxx begins 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx through a hole in the wall xxx the cold 
xxxxxx drawing words xxx in an old tray's ashes... xxx winter cold 
xxxxxx using his head xxx the high priest breaking xxx icicles 
xxxxxx the year's not over xxx but spring comes anyway... xxx who cares?! 
xxxxxx my money sprouted wings xxx and flew away... xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx the way things are, xxx through my worthless window xxx days grow longer 
xxxxxx vain grass, xxx you grow longer xxx as do the days 
xxxxxx the stonecutter xxx chop-chops the mountain... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx clacking clogs xxx turn toward my hut... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx the god kompira's xxx banner fluttering... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx the god kompira's xxx fluttering voice... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx a five or six inch xxx red mandarin orange... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx a toy flute trills xxx a cane click-clacks... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx a short sword xxx stuck in his loincloth... xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx vain mankind, xxx idling away this night xxx of winter moon 
xxxxxx in my wooden clogs xxx raising a racket! xxx winter moon 
xxxxxx cold moon, xxx the blind priest is called xxx by mistake 
xxxxxx a cane strikes stone xxx clack-clack... xxx cold moon 
xxxxxx gichu temple, xxx i'm here too xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx round and round xxx the dried chestnut rosary... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx the outhouse attendant xxx squats... xxx under the winter rain 
xxxxxx a winter rain xxx bumps into the back xxx window 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx the winter rain targets xxx a standing buddha 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx burning the fire chopsticks xxx for fun 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx behind the farmer sowing seeds xxx a crow 
xxxxxx the iron rod xxx goes cling! clang! xxx a hailstorm 
xxxxxx the laughing buddha xxx points... xxx at a hailstone 
xxxxxx adding to the frost xxx the samurai's discarded xxx topknot 
xxxxxx with our gods out of town xxx they raise a ruckus... xxx crows 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx what are you chattering xxx sparrows at my gate? 
xxxxxx you too owl xxx dedicate a haiku... xxx this winter rain 
xxxxxx cedar chopsticks xxx hold the flame... xxx god of wealth festival 
xxxxxx sir crow too xxx quickly gets in line... xxx for soot sweeping 
xxxxxx my house, xxx i sweep its soot xxx with a fan 
xxxxxx even pounding rice cakes xxx at my hut, i chant xxx "great japan!" 
xxxxxx for the dog xxx and crow too... xxx pounding rice cakes 
xxxxxx row of houses, xxx from every one of them xxx a rice cake commotion 
xxxxxx the rice cake flies xxx smack into the dog's xxx open mouth 
xxxxxx the wife sowing wheat, xxx it's that xxx kind of temple 
xxxxxx looking at the moon xxx in the pine... xxx skullcaps too 
xxxxxx first of the season, xxx the snow, too xxx made into buddha 
xxxxxx at my gate too xxx made of snow... xxx little buddha 
xxxxxx putting me into xxx a praying mood... xxx snow buddha 
xxxxxx the farting contest xxx begins again... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx in a kyoto suburb xxx even "winter seclusion"... xxx hustle and bustle 
xxxxxx a cozy wood fire, xxx the buddhas too xxx all lined up 
xxxxxx great edo, xxx four or five mon xxx for medicine 
xxxxxx after taking medicine xxx it begins... xxx the eating binge 
xxxxxx after eating pine needles xxx a chaser xxx of medicine 
xxxxxx thrust into xxx the dried salmon's mouth xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx beating time xxx on a dried salmon too... xxx praise buddha! 
xxxxxx the nightingale's son xxx is singing! xxx he's singing! 
xxxxxx slaving away, xxx even the nightingale xxx has a singing lesson 
xxxxxx at sunset xxx not another peep... xxx little wren 
xxxxxx are you, too xxx waiting for good luck? xxx waterfowl 
xxxxxx arrogantly xxx he presents himself... xxx the pufferfish 
xxxxxx the guy who just left xxx looked the same... xxx face of a pufferfish 
xxxxxx the guy who just left xxx had a similar face... xxx pufferfish 
xxxxxx someone i know xxx has a similar face... xxx pufferfish 
xxxxxx the same color xxx as the winter hay... xxx little house 
xxxxxx putting up a fight, xxx withered grasses xxx with prickles 
xxxxxx maiden flower xxx for what karmic reason xxx do you not fade? 
xxxxxx hut's radish, xxx when there's a visitor xxx you'll be yanked 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even raking leaves xxx brings a scolding 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx we cross sumida river xxx together 
xxxxxx in frost-killed grass xxx to seibi's house, slowly xxx i go 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass xxx "gimme rice!" xxx a sparrow sings 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx what tribute can i offer xxx seibi, now a buddha? 
xxxxxx with a bamboo splinter xxx practicing calligraphy... xxx the stepchild 
xxxxxx celebrating new year's xxx en masse... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx little farm field, xxx even here xxx it's new year's day 
xxxxxx warmly xxx i greet the new year... xxx temple verandah 
xxxxxx spear after spear xxx on new year's day xxx they pass 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx new year's starts xxx at noon 
xxxxxx my shadow too xxx in good health... xxx dawn of spring 
xxxxxx though far from home xxx a new spring xxx is blossoming 
xxxxxx a new spring, xxx neither cow nor horse xxx has trod on it 
xxxxxx a made-to-order xxx pale blue... xxx the year's first sky 
xxxxxx traveling, xxx and a rainless day xxx for the year's first sky! 
xxxxxx cheer the year's xxx first sky... xxx even sparrows! 
xxxxxx through my pajama sleeve xxx taking a peek... xxx the year's first sky 
xxxxxx the year's first sky's xxx first blemish... xxx smoke 
xxxxxx the year's first sky xxx gives a gift... xxx snow flitting down 
xxxxxx this must be a tip xxx from the first sky! xxx the snow flakes 
xxxxxx the year's first sky xxx hits a dead end... xxx kazusa mountains 
xxxxxx back door facing south, xxx three directions xxx for my new year's walk 
xxxxxx the homecoming servants xxx all stop here... xxx meditation bridge 
xxxxxx servants on holiday xxx carry a servant on holiday... xxx palanquin 
xxxxxx the homecoming servants xxx pay their share... xxx hoga bridge 
xxxxxx the servants' holiday is over, xxx the dog, too, sees him off xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx tears precede everything xxx for the parents 
xxxxxx apprentices' holiday... xxx as for the parents, xxx tears precede everything 
xxxxxx servants' holiday, xxx two sighted xxx on mount matchi 
xxxxxx servants on holiday, xxx three of them xxx on narita road 
xxxxxx in his courtier's cap xxx flopped down to sleep... xxx first day of rat 
xxxxxx with a sword strapped on xxx he sleeps on the lawn... xxx first day of rat 
xxxxxx to my hut too xxx new year's arrives... xxx the zoni vendor 
xxxxxx to my hut xxx even on the new year's day xxx zoni vendors come 
xxxxxx after pounding xxx the seven herbs of health... xxx he sleeps 
xxxxxx on the rice cake mill xxx the rooster sings too xxx "oh great japan!" 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx in the thicket xxx a discarded letter blows 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a dog stretched to sleep xxx in the ferryboat 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx an eight-penny play xxx a tea-and-dumpling shop 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx forty-nine old women xxx on the shinano road 
xxxxxx waving umbrella-hats xxx farewell! farewell! xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx voices in the dry goods store xxx hang xxx on the mist 
xxxxxx the barking dog xxx is wearing a robe... xxx of mist 
xxxxxx travelers in bathrobes, xxx snow has melted xxx clean away! 
xxxxxx the last snow pile, xxx straw clogs make it xxx a delight 
xxxxxx a row of houses, xxx even melting snow xxx costs money 
xxxxxx snow has melted, xxx plenty of elbow room xxx for the nettle tree 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx three herons perch xxx on the rice cake tub 
xxxxxx plowing the field xxx he keeps the mountain ridge pine xxx company 
xxxxxx at daybreak xxx what grouchy faces... xxx mr. and mrs. cat 
xxxxxx my hut's cat xxx with a hoarse voice xxx goes carousing 
xxxxxx so love-crazed xxx he chases a chicken... xxx tomcat 
xxxxxx into hell's mirror xxx look! look! xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx the rain in bamboo xxx a drenching bath... xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx he sleeps, he wakes xxx has a big yawn... xxx the cat goes courting 
xxxxxx fool cat, xxx putting his whole body xxx into his yowl 
xxxxxx just a glance xxx at the yowler on the roof... xxx lazy cat 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx with the founder's blessing xxx cats make love 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx with the founder's blessing xxx eating fish 
xxxxxx if he finds a good place xxx he won't return... xxx love-crazed cat 
xxxxxx my cat is known xxx as a thief of hearts xxx scandalous! 
xxxxxx my cat xxx the talk of the town xxx for stealing 
xxxxxx mother cat xxx plays hide-and-seek... xxx with her kittens 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx is o-take buddha xxx at the sink 
xxxxxx is the nightingale weeping xxx at your cloudiness? xxx mount suzuka 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx a fount of life xxx at the grave 
xxxxxx a nightingale singing xxx included in the price... xxx five-penny tea 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx in the big sake cup's xxx wet color 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx he doesn't mind xxx my pipe smoke 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx did you come ten years after xxx the future buddha? 
xxxxxx up to today xxx such great perserverance... xxx goose at my gate 
xxxxxx after many nights xxx telling me bedtime stories xxx the geese have left 
xxxxxx visiting the cat xxx on the turned-over tub... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx the butterfly too xxx on the scales of karma xxx is weighed 
xxxxxx don't dip your butt xxx in that mud! xxx big butterfly 
xxxxxx a spring butterfly xxx peaceful, calm xxx in the seat of honor 
xxxxxx don't be mean xxx to that horsefly xxx paper door! 
xxxxxx once again xxx giving a horsefly grief xxx skylight 
xxxxxx the hand that broke off xxx the plum blossom branch... xxx in hell's mirror 
xxxxxx in hell's mirror xxx the plum-blossom thief's xxx reflection 
xxxxxx plum blossom thievery, xxx added to the account book xxx of hell's judge emma 
xxxxxx in hell's mirror xxx the plum-blossom thief's xxx reflection 
xxxxxx in plum blossom scent xxx they stop fighting... xxx crows 
xxxxxx plum blossoming, xxx how the lice's grandchildren xxx play! 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx in my account book i enter xxx "cash for sake" 
xxxxxx cursing like sailors xxx in the plum tree... xxx crows 
xxxxxx little child, xxx while mama helps him pee-pee xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx on one side xxx sandal tracks, the other xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the toy flute seller xxx clatters along... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx how many is he taking? xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx made fun of xxx by the sparrows... xxx the field's blooming plum trees 
xxxxxx though smoky xxx with incense xxx plum trees in bloom 
xxxxxx the buddha in the field xxx with a red skullcap... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx a village of slackers xxx lackadaisical xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the lazy dog xxx barks lying down... xxx plum trees in bloom 
xxxxxx travel journal, xxx one moon xxx one blooming plum tree 
xxxxxx road to kyoto, xxx at the pickled plum teahouse xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx cool and calm xxx deep in the thorn thicket... xxx blooming plum 
xxxxxx growing feeble, xxx breaking off blossoms xxx with twisted mouth 
xxxxxx deep wooded mountains, xxx home-grown in shinano xxx glorious blossoms 
xxxxxx grandma's rice cakes xxx grandpa's cherry tree xxx in bloom 
xxxxxx trees lined up xxx cramped together... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx for three pennies xxx a cherry tree for planting... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx even a layman xxx praises amida buddha... xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx distracting the fisherman xxx now and then... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx for the fisherman xxx they're a nuisance... xxx evening cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx peace to the world xxx from time immemorial... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx such intricate xxx wildflowers bloomed! xxx in one short night 
xxxxxx from one short night, xxx how intricate xxx the wildflowers 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx the grasses bloom xxx swish, swish, swish! 
xxxxxx a short summer night xxx of rejoicing... xxx secluded village 
xxxxxx the whores xxx look me over... xxx from their boat in the heat 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx fishing for soup stock xxx in his back door sea 
xxxxxx just saying the words xxx "my house" xxx the cool air! 
xxxxxx rainy season, xxx a crab strolls into xxx the big sitting room 
xxxxxx the rainy season is over xxx everywhere else... xxx mount hakone 
xxxxxx some "clear day"! xxx rainy season clouds again xxx on the mountain 
xxxxxx splish splash xxx drenched in fifth month rain xxx lotus field 
xxxxxx must you start xxx with my thatched hut? xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx cloudbursts, xxx the village that doesn't pray xxx gets three 
xxxxxx lying spread-eagle xxx and watching... xxx the peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx once again xxx grannies, wear them too! xxx pots on heads 
xxxxxx at sunset's bell xxx they scatter... xxx cormorant boats 
xxxxxx going out the gate xxx the cormorant's treated royally... xxx wife, child 
xxxxxx the whole town sleeps xxx while the cormorants xxx toil 
xxxxxx the whole town, xxx while the cormorants are made to work xxx night pillows 
xxxxxx after praying for rain xxx in a mood xxx to shoot the musket 
xxxxxx for the mosquitoes xxx life is good... xxx a naked party 
xxxxxx as for everyone else xxx clothes-changing is fun... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx when i'm dead xxx who'll wear it next? xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx even the loafer xxx looks imperial! xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx his prayers for pay xxx pay off... xxx a new summer kimono 
xxxxxx drinking tea alone xxx on the month's first day... xxx green bamboo blinds 
xxxxxx recycling, xxx waste paper mosquito net! xxx mosquito net! 
xxxxxx the moon shines, xxx this paper mosquito net xxx my home 
xxxxxx the face on my paper fan xxx is shameless... xxx but a saint! 
xxxxxx with a face xxx come down from heaven xxx she is fanning 
xxxxxx covering xxx my sinful mouth... xxx my paper fan 
xxxxxx if you go out xxx to enjoy the cool air... xxx grovel and grovel! 
xxxxxx falling to my back xxx spread eagle... xxx the cool air 
xxxxxx a crab, too xxx climbs the pine tree... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx moon at the gate, xxx the mosquito-eating bats xxx prosper 
xxxxxx not backing down xxx even an inch... xxx edo cuckoo 
xxxxxx he just now appeared xxx and he's off to mount fuji... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the setting moon, xxx you just missed it xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx great edo, xxx amid the hustle and bustle xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx in great edo xxx fearing no evil... xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx a lucky, lucky xxx most lucky day xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx of all the gods xxx which ones are real? xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx from today on xxx let no one out-sing you! xxx edo cuckoo 
xxxxxx crawling across a bridge xxx far below... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx crawling across a bridge xxx flying far below... xxx a cuckoo! 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx even fifth month, eighth day xxx is lucky! 
xxxxxx into watanobe's plume grass xxx off you go! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx come back tomorrow xxx and the next day xxx mountain cuckoo! 
xxxxxx taking turns xxx with the prayer gong... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx till i return xxx guard my hut... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't catch scabies xxx from me! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't stay long xxx and get caught in the ivy! xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx shame on you xxx you're all mouth! xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx the wounded firefly xxx rushes inside 
xxxxxx my hut's mosquitoes xxx go out to make a living... xxx moon at dusk 
xxxxxx the mouth that gnawed xxx a flea: "all praise xxx to amida buddha!" 
xxxxxx into the big river xxx tossing her lice... xxx pretty woman 
xxxxxx river at the gate, xxx summer's first bonito xxx look fresh enough to swim away 
xxxxxx move aside xxx horseflies and bees! xxx lotuses are blooming 
xxxxxx in a place xxx where no light flickers xxx the perfect lotus 
xxxxxx a little child xxx smoking a pipe... xxx ripened barley 
xxxxxx at the field's edge xxx sake for sale... xxx ripened barley 
xxxxxx curled up to sleep, xxx his pillow xxx a muskmelon 
xxxxxx cooling the white umbrella-hat xxx just a tad... xxx tree shade 
xxxxxx deep shade, xxx the fasting dog xxx rolls and rolls 
xxxxxx feeling for the tobacco tray xxx with my feet... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx digging a tea cake xxx out of the hearth... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx beards of grasses xxx stuck-up they stand... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx cranks up the volume... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx putting the rice tub's xxx raincoat on... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx dyeing the hands xxx indigo blue... xxx the cold night 
xxxxxx the blabbering fool xxx pokes out his nose to sniff... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx on one side xxx a sleep talker... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx in mountain chill xxx under his reed mat xxx curled to sleep 
xxxxxx mountain chill, xxx in the rice cake tub xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx a chill comes down the mountain xxx a chill comes up... xxx night in my hut 
xxxxxx red clouds, xxx above the butterfly too xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx don't cry, geese! xxx your inn is wherever xxx the autumn moon shines 
xxxxxx restless sleep, xxx tea cakes in the hut xxx for ninth month moon 
xxxxxx autumn rain, xxx the weaned pony xxx begins his journey 
xxxxxx thatched house, xxx everything drenched xxx by the autumn rain 
xxxxxx the tobacco xxx has a green smell... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx tomorrow they throw you away xxx old woman 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the back sitting room's door xxx half open 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx a homeless crow xxx is blown 
xxxxxx completely empty xxx the main temple... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx walking along the valley's cliff xxx my shadow 
xxxxxx how much xxx for two quarts? xxx pearls of dew 
xxxxxx silver dewdrops, xxx without fussing xxx become round 
xxxxxx it's a dewdrop world xxx surely it is... xxx yes... but... 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx where even beads of dew xxx are bent 
xxxxxx a good rain, xxx two-penny fireworks xxx in the night 
xxxxxx it's become a tree xxx of clinging people! xxx sumo match 
xxxxxx newly made xxx the mountain scarecrow xxx is a wonder 
xxxxxx a cowherd, xxx his flute and evening's xxx cloth-pounding mingle 
xxxxxx seeing that i'm old xxx he starts pounding cloth... xxx nearby 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx nearby cloth-pounding xxx better than distant 
xxxxxx utterly rhythmless xxx at my house! xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx the newly arrived goose xxx lifts one leg... xxx deep meditation 
xxxxxx green insect xxx and brown insect... xxx night in my hut 
xxxxxx green insect xxx and brown insect... xxx a duet 
xxxxxx in the paper lantern xxx for a quick chirp... xxx green insect 
xxxxxx among the insects xxx not a single old voice xxx is heard 
xxxxxx don't cry, insects! xxx we're all headed xxx for the same exit 
xxxxxx in the whirlwind xxx like rice cakes... xxx autumn butterflies 
xxxxxx departing for the festival xxx all in red xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx getting drenched xxx with big, blinking eyes... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx the locust goes swimming... xxx lake 
xxxxxx a quick dip xxx in the lake... xxx locust 
xxxxxx catching a ride xxx on the ditch water... xxx locust 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx on the mountain of rice xxx katydid 
xxxxxx on one sinde xxx the sound of the piss pot... xxx on the other, a katydid 
xxxxxx how annoying! xxx among chrysanthemums too xxx the nobles win 
xxxxxx chrysanthemums bloom, xxx the mountain's head, too xxx turns white 
xxxxxx the war lord xxx has pull... xxx chrysanthemum contest 
xxxxxx if it weren't for people xxx they'd not grow crooked... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx losing the contest xxx surprise! the lord's chrysanthemum xxx won 
xxxxxx used to losing xxx i'm peaceful, calm... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx my chrysanthemum xxx faces the direction xxx she chooses 
xxxxxx crushed under xxx the morning-glories... xxx my door 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx in the bamboo, a crow xxx in the bush clover, a cat 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx blooming buckwheat's whiteness xxx makes me shiver 
xxxxxx buckwheat blooming, xxx that whiteness xxx makes me shiver 
xxxxxx each and every one xxx has come to blossom... xxx sun-warmed rice 
xxxxxx quickly stuffing xxx the temple gong... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx with a singing cicada xxx softly... xxx one leaf falls 
xxxxxx overturning the cold xxx of morning... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx for generations xxx from this poor hedge... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx encircling the house xxx that emits no smoke... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx the big chestnut xxx shares his prickly home xxx with a worm 
xxxxxx through the thin wall xxx the cold barges xxx in 
xxxxxx night in the hut, xxx the deep, deep heart xxx of cold 
xxxxxx down to the bone xxx bitter cold... xxx the novice priest 
xxxxxx carrying rice xxx while singing a ditty xxx crossing the ice 
xxxxxx my house's xxx only face towel xxx frozen stiff 
xxxxxx from the tip xxx of the field buddha's nose... xxx an icicle 
xxxxxx my house, xxx even the first icicle xxx soot-stained 
xxxxxx falling on only xxx three houses... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx the stepchild's finger xxx in his mouth... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx unladylike she crouches xxx astride the brazier 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx wrapped in tree leaves xxx a salted fish 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx in the eaves an insect cage xxx and dried persimmons 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx scratched to bits... xxx crows 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx this year the voice xxx is weaker 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx on the desktop xxx a snowball 
xxxxxx clinging fast xxx to my house's rear wall... xxx dirty snow 
xxxxxx just a smidgen of light xxx from the snow... xxx latrine alley 
xxxxxx bottoms up xxx the kettles drying xxx on the snow 
xxxxxx snowy day, xxx practicing writing xxx in the tray's ashes 
xxxxxx the child carries xxx her cloth monkey... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx to the town's center xxx under a table he goes... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx a child holds a winnow xxx over his head... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx the first winter rain xxx didn't forget... xxx the twelfth day! 
xxxxxx olden times tug at the heart, xxx the old man's xxx wooden bowl 
xxxxxx my hut's soot, xxx a storm kindly xxx does the sweeping 
xxxxxx my hut's soot, xxx just blowing it xxx does the job 
xxxxxx my hut's soot, xxx going through the motions xxx of sweeping it 
xxxxxx sweeping the soot xxx washing the fence... xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx play in this soot xxx i swept! xxx gate's sparrows 
xxxxxx chickens trampling xxx the rice cakes... xxx a comedy 
xxxxxx the sound of pounding, xxx millet dumpling xxx being made 
xxxxxx the fresh rice cake xxx goes flying... xxx the dog's mouth 
xxxxxx in this world xxx even my kneading makes xxx rice cakes! 
xxxxxx pigeons and sparrows xxx come! come! xxx i've got rice cakes 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx on a boat, too, a party xxx drinks away the year 
xxxxxx from the bill collector xxx a ladel full xxx of water 
xxxxxx on the road xxx even a cat's futon xxx i borrow 
xxxxxx putting on snowshoes xxx going outside... xxx for no reason 
xxxxxx the servant displays xxx a holy image... xxx snow buddha 
xxxxxx the puppy xxx chases after it... xxx snowball 
xxxxxx this year it doesn't reach xxx the nettle tree... xxx my snowball 
xxxxxx mother dog xxx blocks with her butt... xxx snowball 
xxxxxx mother dog xxx opens it with her head... xxx snow shed 
xxxxxx the stray dog xxx opens it with his butt... xxx snow shed 
xxxxxx the stray dog xxx wriggles in head-first... xxx snow shed 
xxxxxx for the expert xxx at swatting flies... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx a war lord xxx drenching wet, passes xxx my cozy brazier 
xxxxxx "it's good at first!" xxx her foot pushes xxx the foot-warmer 
xxxxxx how shameful, xxx with my charcoal-stained xxx palms... 
xxxxxx in careful bits xxx another thing of this floating world... xxx weighing charcoal 
xxxxxx a cozy wood fire, xxx the high priest also xxx takes a seat 
xxxxxx even breaking firewood xxx with my knee... xxx a feat 
xxxxxx though night is pitch black xxx the banked fire xxx works fine 
xxxxxx painted fan's prostitute xxx laugh at me too! xxx taking medicine 
xxxxxx why so restless xxx restless, restless? xxx little wren 
xxxxxx a wren xxx on the dog's prowling route xxx creeps 
xxxxxx little wren xxx in falling rain drenched xxx to the bone 
xxxxxx here and there xxx in little meetings... xxx plovers 
xxxxxx going out to piss xxx for the hundredth time... xxx plovers in the night 
xxxxxx bright moon, xxx the plovers all buried xxx in the house's thatch 
xxxxxx what a huge convocation! xxx plovers xxx on the beach 
xxxxxx is the falling snow xxx medicine for your voices xxx plovers? 
xxxxxx with red leaves xxx on their heads, the waterfowl xxx asleep 
xxxxxx chrysanthemums, too xxx in the withering mix... xxx temple road 
xxxxxx even the grasses xxx that stab people xxx clumsily wither 
xxxxxx withered grassland, xxx once upon a time there was xxx a she-demon... 
xxxxxx a battle royal xxx with radishes... xxx children 
xxxxxx in fallen leaves xxx the crow who respects xxx his parents 
xxxxxx burying the latrine xxx of the lover cat... xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx without you, xxx the grove xxx is just a grove 
xxxxxx oh gods xxx this year again i pray... xxx two children, please? 
xxxxxx though it's first month xxx twenty days xxx in my winter coat 
xxxxxx first month, xxx even at the outcaste's porch xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx first month, xxx tonight a night xxx of plum blossom moon 
xxxxxx crawl and laugh, xxx from this morning on xxx a two year old! 
xxxxxx at my feet xxx a bird springs up xxx with the spring! 
xxxxxx new spring xxx yataro dies, priest issa xxx is born 
xxxxxx spring has sprung, xxx a one-day, two-day xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx with millet dumplings xxx a peaceful spring xxx rolls in 
xxxxxx morning's raindrops trace xxx the wrinkles of my hands... xxx year's first day 
xxxxxx in the storehouse xxx the hoe glinting... xxx year's first dawn 
xxxxxx from the storehouse xxx shining slantwise... xxx year's first sun 
xxxxxx at my hermitage xxx it starts at noon... xxx the year's first day 
xxxxxx year's first sunrise, xxx even the hoe xxx gets a prayer 
xxxxxx we follow our feet xxx to the village... xxx our new year's walk 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx through a half-folded folding door xxx my new year's walk 
xxxxxx a big snow, xxx the exit tunnel xxx is my lucky direction 
xxxxxx deep in saga, xxx my new year's walk xxx follows holes made by canes 
xxxxxx edge of a field, xxx my new year's walk xxx follows holes made by canes 
xxxxxx lit by the new year's xxx shelf... xxx the hoe's halo 
xxxxxx new year's shelf, xxx from a dark nook xxx a lucky mouse 
xxxxxx my hut, xxx it's a crooked path xxx to the new year's shelf 
xxxxxx hauled up xxx in the bamboo basket... xxx a sparrow! 
xxxxxx little new year's, xxx and the moon has deigned xxx to rise! 
xxxxxx new year's bonfire xxx and a new year's snow xxx coming down 
xxxxxx clinging to xxx the eternal youth ornament xxx the crying child 
xxxxxx sucking on xxx the eternal youth ornament... xxx sleeping child 
xxxxxx the puppy plays xxx hide-and-seek... xxx new year's pine 
xxxxxx karasaki, xxx even from the new year's pine xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx even an ownerless grave xxx decorated with pine 
xxxxxx beyond the reach xxx of the red horse's mouth... xxx new year's rope 
xxxxxx a new year's wreath xxx for the crossroads buddha's xxx head 
xxxxxx imperial japan, xxx even from the quince hedge xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx katsushika, xxx from across the river xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx with muddy straw sandals... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx samurai street, xxx even from the quince thicket xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx a good world, xxx even from the quince thicket xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx tea smoke, xxx my year's first water xxx from sumida river 
xxxxxx bathing in the xxx new year's water... xxx my proxy the sparrow 
xxxxxx greedily using up xxx the year's first water... xxx the woman 
xxxxxx year's first water, xxx sparrows in a row xxx with healthy faces 
xxxxxx year's first water, xxx the first goes to buddha's xxx bucket of branches 
xxxxxx the dog chewing xxx the shuttlecock xxx comes running along 
xxxxxx the shuttlecock reaches xxx its edge... xxx crescent moon 
xxxxxx age of the gods! xxx even for me a square xxx of zoni 
xxxxxx though we say xxx "happy new year!" xxx zoni for only two 
xxxxxx mount fuji dawn, xxx a new year's sake toast xxx at my lips 
xxxxxx barrier gate, xxx a new year's sake toast xxx to mount fuji 
xxxxxx a new year's toast xxx on his shaved head... xxx he goes forth 
xxxxxx beaten out xxx by the women... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx two or three leaves xxx then calling it quits... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the sickle moon xxx curls up, winter's cold xxx returns 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx here too everyone's xxx curled asleep 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx his account book serves xxx as a pillow 
xxxxxx "it's a foolishly long xxx day!"...the crow opens xxx his mouth 
xxxxxx the day is devilishly xxx long! xxx long! 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, where? xxx second month snow xxx two or three feet deep 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, where? xxx snow falls in clumps xxx among the sparrows 
xxxxxx improving the mood xxx of the geese and ducks... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx my village, xxx even the spring snow xxx two or three feet! 
xxxxxx the pigeon too xxx sings at six a.m. xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx in a stone's hollow xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx under their parasols xxx crossing mount hakone... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx deer gamboling xxx in the grass... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx little shrine xxx with rice cake, of course... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx no drinking, no smoking xxx allowed... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx licking a bamboo leaf's xxx spring rain... xxx mouse 
xxxxxx from the temple's great gate xxx long drops from the eaves... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the hanging shelf's xxx azaleas bloom... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx hitting the windows xxx that cost me so much 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx backsliding gamblers xxx and a night sermon 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx beards in a row xxx at the paper door 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx in the window they haggle xxx over fish 
xxxxxx blowing from the raindrops xxx from the eaves... xxx spring wind 
xxxxxx the spring breeze xxx dries the horse... xxx field by the gate 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a woman also crosses xxx mount hakone 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx the little servant girl xxx has a short sword 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx after twists and turns xxx hoga bridge 
xxxxxx through falling snow xxx a spring breeze xxx blows 
xxxxxx a snapping turtle too xxx crows the time... xxx spring moon 
xxxxxx hazy night, xxx sake is flowing xxx waterfall and moon 
xxxxxx great lanterns xxx with the plum blossom crest... xxx out of mist 
xxxxxx into the misty field xxx let's go! xxx refreshing our souls 
xxxxxx spring mist xxx and falling snow... xxx my home mountains 
xxxxxx cloth hung to dry xxx adds to the mist... xxx soaring 
xxxxxx my home village xxx in the spring mist, snow xxx is falling 
xxxxxx even in the mist xxx my house xxx is a mess 
xxxxxx possessed xxx by the heat shimmers... xxx thatched hut 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx walking along he preaches xxx his sermon 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx among grasses of the eaves xxx flowers 
xxxxxx city life, xxx even melting snow xxx costs money 
xxxxxx in the big river xxx square slabs of snow, too xxx float away 
xxxxxx the gate's snow xxx in a perfect square xxx flows away 
xxxxxx firewood laid out xxx on the eaves... xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx on the eaves xxx firewood and a cat... xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx the village dog xxx shows the river crossing xxx melting snow 
xxxxxx even the sparrow xxx gives a victory cry... xxx snow is melting! 
xxxxxx snow melting, xxx the thin children xxx of the slum 
xxxxxx six feet of curtain xxx flapping... xxx the snow is melting! 
xxxxxx tea smoke, xxx the hut's rice seedlings xxx turning green 
xxxxxx the rice seedlings xxx my hut's adornment... xxx so green! 
xxxxxx rice seedlings, xxx the old buddha's xxx weary face 
xxxxxx the rice plants xxx i planted, five or six xxx so green! 
xxxxxx a confusing mix xxx of rain and snow... xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx the west lies xxx on the other shore xxx of the road to zenko temple 
xxxxxx west of the road xxx to zenko temple... xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx the little gambling shack xxx is pounded... xxx spring equinox rain 
xxxxxx in my village xxx snow falls pit-a-pat... xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx peach festival, xxx a doll of princess kaguya xxx fired in fukakusa 
xxxxxx "cousin doll" xxx and "grandchild doll" xxx she names them 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx in the middle of a field xxx eating herb cakes 
xxxxxx lined up double file xxx the tea pickers' xxx ritual dance 
xxxxxx in his little bag, xxx rice and few xxx tea leaves 
xxxxxx the high priest xxx joins right in... xxx tea-picking song 
xxxxxx a fruitful year's xxx letter "f" burning... xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx lit by mountain fires xxx floating downriver... xxx night boat 
xxxxxx plowing the field xxx crushed underfoot... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx mountain field, xxx a man plows it xxx for the sleeping deer 
xxxxxx a plum branch in his hand xxx the tree-grafting apprentice xxx bows 
xxxxxx grafting a branch, xxx i might be dead xxx tomorrow 
xxxxxx grafting a branch, xxx tomorrow i might xxx be a buddha 
xxxxxx garden's entrance, xxx the tree-grafting apprentice xxx brings the tea 
xxxxxx when three loafers xxx happen to meet... xxx grafting branches 
xxxxxx to help digest xxx the rice cakes, grafting xxx the tree 
xxxxxx the dog bows to it xxx with reverence... xxx grafted tree 
xxxxxx "a clumsy job!" xxx a frog laughs xxx at my grafted tree 
xxxxxx breakfast rice xxx stuck in his whiskers... xxx lover cat in a rush 
xxxxxx from darkness xxx into darkness xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx though everyone knows xxx his secret, still xxx a love-crazed cat 
xxxxxx tagging along xxx for the meal... xxx the cat's lady friend 
xxxxxx a food thief xxx in his spare time... xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx fool cat xxx though tethered still crying xxx for love 
xxxxxx the kitten xxx being weighed in the scales xxx keeps playing 
xxxxxx dejected, xxx even among sparrows xxx a stepchild 
xxxxxx sparrow parents too xxx bring their children... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx "watch out for that horse! xxx watch out!" xxx mother sparrow calls 
xxxxxx looking haggard xxx from her baby-sitting... xxx sparrow at the gate 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx morning after morning xxx in the nettle tree i pray to 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx the cat under the bucket xxx meows 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even strutting on the fence xxx a song 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx after his rounds xxx back to my hut 
xxxxxx hey nightingale! xxx from this morning on yataro xxx is issa 
xxxxxx back window, xxx the first nightingale too xxx a blank face 
xxxxxx wafting through trees xxx a beggar's flute xxx a nightingale's song 
xxxxxx out of the saint's xxx big pot... xxx a lark 
xxxxxx two miles to go xxx to oiwake... xxx a skylark! 
xxxxxx two miles to go xxx to oiwake... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx on a tiny island, too xxx plowing xxx to the lark's song 
xxxxxx "sakamoto's that way!" xxx says the lark and temple bell xxx two miles off 
xxxxxx at a tiny market's xxx vegetable festival... xxx a skylark 
xxxxxx matsushima, xxx from yonder isle xxx another lark 
xxxxxx island of pines, xxx while mist turns dark xxx a skylark singing 
xxxxxx darkness settles xxx over a tiny isle of pines... xxx a skylark singing 
xxxxxx a man sleeping xxx in a straw raincoat... xxx the lark's wake-up call 
xxxxxx an impromptu audience xxx with lord kaga... xxx a pheasant 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx from the rice cake tub xxx from the wash tub 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries xxx just when the blind man xxx crawls across the bridge 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries xxx in the temple room's xxx dead center 
xxxxxx big rain, xxx soaked to the skin xxx the returning geese 
xxxxxx are the geese yearning xxx to depart... xxx or not? 
xxxxxx geese flying north xxx don't neglect to stop xxx for my thin smoke! 
xxxxxx on the geese, too xxx the seductive rain xxx falling 
xxxxxx is today a good day xxx to journey too? xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx divorcing xxx the pine tree... xxx geese on the move 
xxxxxx on what day xxx will you pass my village? xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx on the straw lid xxx of the smallpox god... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx the moon at your feet xxx look! xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx after the big frog xxx one by one xxx they take their seats 
xxxxxx falling blossoms... xxx "i'll conquer you!" xxx croaks the frog 
xxxxxx standing on tiptoe xxx as night falls... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx tucking themselves in xxx under butterbur leaves... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the sickle moon... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx festival day, xxx white robed monks xxx and a white butterfly 
xxxxxx becoming beautiful xxx buddhas, butterfly xxx husband and wife 
xxxxxx playing with xxx the big cat's tail... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx from a hole in the temple's xxx pulpit, swish! xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx shrine fence, xxx on a white flower xxx a white butterfly 
xxxxxx separation xxx among butterflies too... xxx white gang, yellow gang 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx the vast blue sky xxx over tiger gate 
xxxxxx butterfly departs, xxx even shinran's pine xxx seems to know 
xxxxxx tiger gate, xxx the butterfly, too xxx enters with courage 
xxxxxx one straw mat, xxx a butterfly is drying xxx too 
xxxxxx granny drying her hair xxx and a butterfly... xxx one straw mat 
xxxxxx swinging the broom xxx underneath, asleep xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx butterfly dance, xxx someone plays samisen xxx in the little village 
xxxxxx dance, butterfly! xxx someone plays samisen xxx in asaji field 
xxxxxx dance, butterfly! xxx someone plays samisen xxx in asaji field 
xxxxxx butterfly dance, xxx someone plays samisen xxx in the little village 
xxxxxx called "mister" xxx by those who raise them... xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx a promising sound, xxx silkworms in the tray xxx stuff themselves 
xxxxxx like people xxx silkworms in the tray xxx take a siesta 
xxxxxx the whole village xxx pays them court... xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx the whole family xxx serves the midnight meal xxx for silkworms 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx the bees also memorize xxx the way back 
xxxxxx at the crossroads temple xxx usurping the bees... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx bees buzzing xxx people grow quiet xxx in the temple 
xxxxxx beehive, xxx safe on holy jizo's xxx elbow 
xxxxxx garden at the gate, xxx even the naughty weeds xxx young and fresh 
xxxxxx on baby grass xxx rubbing his back... xxx field horse 
xxxxxx using his nose xxx the puppy searches xxx the violets 
xxxxxx "from here on in xxx the hut's our territory!" xxx violets 
xxxxxx spreading tissue paper xxx sitting down... xxx violets 
xxxxxx in the little tub xxx in the rice cake tub... xxx a mustard flower blizzard 
xxxxxx now and then xxx the cat scratches his face... xxx budding trees 
xxxxxx one house xxx one plum tree... xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent xxx hot bath scent, outside xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx plum blooming xxx even hell's cauldrons xxx closed 
xxxxxx even popeyed emma xxx hell's judge, gawks... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx in the paper door xxx a cat's shadow 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx all sorts of people xxx pass my gaze 
xxxxxx blooming plum tree xxx in the hut's xxx unlucky direction 
xxxxxx plum tree, xxx on my hut's unlucky side xxx blooming! 
xxxxxx plum blossom world, xxx worms in straw raincoats xxx are here too 
xxxxxx back-alley house, xxx thrust out, swaying xxx plum in bloom 
xxxxxx in my gate xxx thrust out, swaying xxx plum branch 
xxxxxx with his courtier's hat xxx on his high horse... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the big horse xxx rubs his rump... xxx plum blossoms in the field 
xxxxxx holy jizo xxx stretch forth your hand! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx little boy xxx laugh once more! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx tell passers-by xxx my door lock's broken! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the sickle moon xxx in a fine mood too... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx morning star, xxx on my hut's unlucky side xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even the rice cake xxx has a seat... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in hot water steam xxx struggling to bloom... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the palanquin bearers xxx are women! xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx today no blossom viewing xxx for me... xxx feeling afraid 
xxxxxx a "dismount your horse" sign, xxx the cherry blossoms' xxx front door 
xxxxxx all morning xxx to the falling blossoms... xxx my farts 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter xxx on a long, long day... xxx ojo temple 
xxxxxx at the field's edge xxx a sake vendor... xxx glorious blossoms 
xxxxxx breaking off blossoms, xxx my hiccups xxx are cured 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx playing the dandy, in my mouth xxx an empty pipe 
xxxxxx blossoms scatter, xxx under every tree xxx a buddha on display 
xxxxxx blossoms scatter xxx toward the setting sun... xxx ojo temple 
xxxxxx in a world of blossoms xxx wearing an umbrella-hat... xxx a buddha 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx even among the buddhas xxx parents and children 
xxxxxx all day xxx amid the cherry blossoms xxx picking fights 
xxxxxx the big horse xxx rubs his butt xxx on cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx great japan, xxx on the dark blue shop-curtains xxx more cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx off to view cherry blossoms xxx old man with kimono xxx tucked 
xxxxxx little straw mat xxx splashed all over... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx pulling up xxx his fishhook he looks... xxx at cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx the temple guard xxx sick from the crowds... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx sensing the sound xxx of lacquered clogs... xxx cherry blossoms scatter 
xxxxxx toward lacquered clogs xxx cherry blossoms xxx scatter 
xxxxxx sensing the sound xxx of lacquered clogs... xxx cherry blossoms scatter 
xxxxxx waking with a big xxx yawn... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx fluttering down xxx mulch for the field xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx falling, falling xxx all over the food... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx on the flesh xxx of the yellow rose... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx the yellow rose xxx in fourth month's "spring" xxx finally dies 
xxxxxx yellow rose xxx don't die! until evenings xxx of fireflies 
xxxxxx the green willow's xxx friendliness rubs off xxx on my house 
xxxxxx penny toss gamblers xxx ten games at once... xxx willow trees 
xxxxxx even for my truly xxx crappy hut, now... xxx a green willow! 
xxxxxx "take a shortcut though me!" xxx the willow xxx suggests 
xxxxxx here and there xxx a plain and to-the-point xxx willow 
xxxxxx my willow tree, xxx not that good xxx at drooping 
xxxxxx the green vine xxx peeks in the window... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx hot day, xxx the cool abacus xxx for a pillow 
xxxxxx so hot! so hot! xxx sleeping xxx is a chore 
xxxxxx the white caterpillar xxx on the chestnut tree... xxx also is hot! 
xxxxxx shinano road's mountains xxx bearing down... xxx the heat! 
xxxxxx vipers live xxx in this grass, i've heard... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx in the cool air xxx like amida buddha... xxx cross-legged 
xxxxxx in the cool air xxx like gautama buddha... xxx cross-legged 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even beyond the village xxx the prayed-for rain 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx digging up moss xxx on mount izuna 
xxxxxx divine wind, xxx digging up moss xxx on the autumn mountain 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx taking his seat on a rock xxx toad 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx an incense stick stuck xxx in the tobacco tray 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx in a rain barrel xxx irises 
xxxxxx mr. toad's xxx sour buddha face... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx a servant in zen meditation xxx faces a wall... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx three days waiting xxx for this cloudburst... xxx three drops 
xxxxxx darting to the beat xxx of the downpour... xxx a swallow 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx two or three cups, now xxx drink up! drink up! 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx bare-chested with a little xxx sake cup 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx on this lawn, that lawn xxx just a cup's worth 
xxxxxx gliding through the cloudburst xxx so cleverly... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx the floating cloud xxx pushes up peaks xxx with ease 
xxxxxx on my sleeping mat xxx counting with my feet... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx evening bell, xxx even the clouds convene xxx at the temple 
xxxxxx how good xxx to see a pagoda! xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx big river, xxx pouring into my sake cup xxx the summer moon 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx an excessively polite xxx red flower 
xxxxxx wanting to lick xxx the birthday buddha... xxx crying child 
xxxxxx "gimme that moon!" xxx cries the crying xxx child 
xxxxxx anointing the heads xxx of children too... xxx buddha's birthday tea 
xxxxxx buddha amid birthday flowers, xxx even the moon xxx deigns to rise 
xxxxxx the ordinary bee xxx struts like a peacock... xxx buddha's birthday flowers 
xxxxxx buddha's fourth month xxx eighth day... xxx red flowers 
xxxxxx the buddha xxx even in beggar-town xxx is born 
xxxxxx wrapped in a knot xxx 'round the tree at my gate... xxx summer banner 
xxxxxx briefly a swallow xxx clings to it... xxx summer banner 
xxxxxx even the cormorants xxx on holiday today... xxx festival 
xxxxxx the mother cormorant xxx cries at the gate xxx "come home!" 
xxxxxx she answers "how old?" xxx with one hand... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx "she has lucky ears" xxx her mother says... xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx how delightful, xxx my sweat-soaked xxx bathrobe! 
xxxxxx sleeping late xxx under my mosquito net... xxx call of the tofu vendor 
xxxxxx with elbows propped xxx on his abacus... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx with his elbows xxx on his abacus... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx spread-eagle arms xxx legs opened wide... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx siesta work xxx for the stepchild... xxx picking brother's fleas 
xxxxxx singing a song xxx and slapping his butt... xxx with a fan 
xxxxxx covering his face xxx curled up to sleep... xxx a paper fan 
xxxxxx the great demoness xxx flits and flutters... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx when it's in hand xxx i want to promenade... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx a sooty paper fan xxx works fine 
xxxxxx from the second floor xxx she peers at me too! xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx over the rented room's xxx threshold... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx the puppy guards xxx my pipe lighting tool... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx scooping up the ocean xxx in my hands... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx making the doll xxx sell rice cakes... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a doll is made xxx to bring my tea... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx straw mat marks xxx on my cheek... xxx a cool breeze 
xxxxxx the main temple's roof xxx dripping long raindrops... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx i sit too xxx at the rice planters' xxx dinner tray 
xxxxxx someone else's child xxx just ten or thereabouts... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx back from his journey xxx into the saddle... xxx rice-planting horse 
xxxxxx bats flying, xxx for the well coifed woman in her forties too xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx don't let the rain xxx escape to ishiyama! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the sky painted xxx with washed-out ink... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx once again summoning xxx karasaki's rain... xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx the juggler's red xxx sleeve cord... xxx and a cuckoo 
xxxxxx jiro, go to sleep! xxx the foolish cuckoo xxx sings too much 
xxxxxx for pure white flowers xxx it's the fourth month... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx for pure white flowers xxx fourth month, eighth day xxx has arrived! 
xxxxxx my eight-penny azaleas xxx are blooming... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx the cuckoo xxx breaking in, shuts xxx me up 
xxxxxx oh cuckoo, xxx don't disdain xxx these poor ears! 
xxxxxx what a racket, xxx chase him! chase him! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't go! don't go! xxx these are my friends xxx a mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx voices calling xxx here and there, perplexing xxx the firefly 
xxxxxx one swarm xxx comes from ishiyama... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx when we quarrel xxx out you go! xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx in the west xxx battling like ancients monks xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx sleeping mat, xxx rain drips, drops xxx a firefly takes off 
xxxxxx the first firefly xxx deftly swerves away... xxx wind from my hand 
xxxxxx bancho town, xxx with all his might xxx the firefly flits 
xxxxxx firefly lights, xxx a turtle not called for xxx close at hand 
xxxxxx smack in the middle xxx of the old quarter... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx on my sleeve xxx catching his breath... xxx worn-out firefly 
xxxxxx swatting prayer beads xxx at a pesky mosquito... xxx memorial service 
xxxxxx a mosquito whines, xxx an old keg xxx my pillow 
xxxxxx from the third column xxx of the mosquito swarm... xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx mosquito column, xxx unbroken from here xxx to the field 
xxxxxx straight up and down, xxx the mosquitoes swarm xxx a column 
xxxxxx child's fleas, xxx it's leisure time work xxx picking them 
xxxxxx she counts flea bites xxx while her child xxx suckles 
xxxxxx the stepchild's chore, xxx during baby's midday nap xxx picking fleas 
xxxxxx upside-down xxx the bucket's drying day... xxx winged ants flying 
xxxxxx oh great peony xxx don't disdain xxx this poor neighborhood! 
xxxxxx by itself xxx the head is bowing... xxx peony! 
xxxxxx its shadow, too xxx seven feet away... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx "the peony is this big!" xxx the child's arms xxx outstretched 
xxxxxx i lay my sake cup xxx on top for a moment... xxx peony 
xxxxxx my hut's garden xxx is narrowed xxx by blooming peonies 
xxxxxx shaded by the xxx samurai's umbrella... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx i call mr. toad xxx "lucky" too... xxx peony 
xxxxxx where piss dribbles, xxx dribbles down... xxx irises 
xxxxxx an old-time daybreak xxx for the old post... xxx irises 
xxxxxx the long skinny snake's xxx shinto shrine... xxx irises 
xxxxxx black ears too xxx bustling in the world... xxx barley field 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx even where people sleep xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx my gate's hedge, xxx no flourishing xxx of fresh green 
xxxxxx splish-splash xxx the white wall washed... xxx by fresh leaves 
xxxxxx so carefully rolled xxx by a bug... xxx new green leaf 
xxxxxx the bridge guard's bucket xxx upside-down to dry... xxx fresh leaves 
xxxxxx new leaves forming, xxx in the town a drought xxx of men 
xxxxxx straw sandals and insects xxx dangling... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx in the wash basin xxx in the rice cake tub... xxx a deutzia blossom blizzard 
xxxxxx "a man" xxx is registered at the inn... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx keeping out night's cold xxx a patchwork fence 
xxxxxx the good-for-nothing priest xxx is used to it... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx practising writing xxx in the tray's ashes... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx a weasel sports xxx with the shrine's guard... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx with a lantern xxx crossing the shady thicket... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx two miles to go xxx to oiwake... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx two miles to go xxx to oiwake... xxx a skylark! 
xxxxxx in her cave the demon sleeps, xxx from morning on xxx autumn's last day 
xxxxxx rice water boiling xxx bubble, bubble! xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx stowed in the alcove xxx walking stick, straw sandals... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx one, two, three, four xxx counting the firewood... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx my house xxx just two miles more... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx even in the watchman's shack out back xxx festival guests 
xxxxxx into the kiso mountains xxx it flows... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx a little boy xxx shows another child... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx in the kettle slantwise xxx milky way 
xxxxxx the turtle and moon xxx merge... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the little post xxx gets a scrubbing too... xxx bon festival moon 
xxxxxx the beards of grasses xxx in a mood for rain... xxx night before the harvest moon 
xxxxxx purification font, xxx thrown in a corner xxx the ninth month moon 
xxxxxx clear fall weather, xxx with burdens they cross xxx mount hakone 
xxxxxx unaware xxx of the clear fall weather... xxx layman 
xxxxxx a pilgrim rides by xxx on a horse... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx a game of cards... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx on the lightning-scorched xxx mountain... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the new beggar's xxx small voice 
xxxxxx autumn wind xxx on the mulberry leaves xxx left unplucked 
xxxxxx to enlightened eyes xxx buddha's bones? xxx dewdrops in the grass 
xxxxxx without buddha's law xxx no glitter... xxx dewdrops in the grass 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx suddenly three people xxx face to face 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx not giving a damn xxx the toad's face 
xxxxxx seaside temple, xxx the room in the mist xxx grows faint 
xxxxxx misty rain xxx misty nights, misty days... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx divine wind, xxx digging up moss xxx on the autumn mountain 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx digging up moss xxx on mount izuna 
xxxxxx the buddha also xxx with umbrella-hat... xxx crossroads dance 
xxxxxx bald heads in a row... xxx greeting the stars xxx of tanabata 
xxxxxx chirr-chirr! insects also xxx work their looms... xxx stars of tanabata 
xxxxxx sucking on the xxx mulberry leaf poem... xxx the crawling child 
xxxxxx though made of paper xxx a mulberry leaf poem... xxx for the festival 
xxxxxx reaching the bedroom xxx of the star couple... xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx suddenly a crowd xxx for the sumo match... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx staggering xxx i'm the scarecrow's xxx replacement 
xxxxxx absent-minded xxx i'm the scarecrow's xxx replacement 
xxxxxx the dragonflies' xxx resort spot... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx the dragonfly xxx settles to sleep... xxx on the scarecrow 
xxxxxx evening falls, xxx me and a scarecrow xxx just us two 
xxxxxx draining the rice field, xxx farewell! farewell! xxx farewell! 
xxxxxx draining the rice field, xxx a loach also xxx climbs the rapids 
xxxxxx evening cloth-pounding, xxx the neighbor's xxx neighbor 
xxxxxx that's my house xxx about two miles away... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx my hut, two miles xxx from where you're pounding xxx cloth 
xxxxxx two young deer xxx side by side... xxx a duet 
xxxxxx a shrike sings, xxx seven days of sermons xxx one fart 
xxxxxx isozaki, xxx wild geese descend xxx even into a kettle! 
xxxxxx autumn's first geese, xxx five people enroute xxx to zenko temple 
xxxxxx the caged insect xxx sings a love song xxx to his wife 
xxxxxx cicada, from morning on xxx its ruckus... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx leaving my shoulder xxx for the buddha's... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx a good world! xxx crickets ring xxx a black kite wheels 
xxxxxx spreading a straw mat xxx at the gate's field... xxx a locust lands 
xxxxxx crossing the sweep xxx of the sickle's blade... xxx a brave locust 
xxxxxx a quick song xxx inside the lantern... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx the katydid xxx in the paper bag... xxx still singing 
xxxxxx the champion chrysanthemum xxx down the war lord's lane xxx returns 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum garden, xxx only women xxx on the one bench 
xxxxxx smelling like sake xxx smelling like piss xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx watered by xxx the village dog... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx getting used xxx to to voices of edo... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the losing chrysanthemum xxx punished... xxx in a corner 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx even sweet tea cakes xxx chrysanthemum-shaped 
xxxxxx the chrysanthemum xxx i call "good" xxx i eat 
xxxxxx they've bloomed xxx for the soup stock... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx rain splashing xxx the morning-glories... xxx my pillow 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx have bloomed blackly... xxx but my hair... 
xxxxxx morning-glory, xxx one inch from its tip xxx darkness 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx all praise to ah... xxx ahhhh! 
xxxxxx hidden in trees xxx the white morning-glory's xxx demure face 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx a new morning-glory xxx blooms in bondage 
xxxxxx in a little nook xxx acting stuck-up... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx after the harvest xxx finding a rice stalk... xxx praise buddha! 
xxxxxx wagtails march through xxx sucking them up... xxx rice gleanings 
xxxxxx to japan's xxx farthest shores... xxx rice gleanings 
xxxxxx dropped by the xxx foraging birds... xxx rice gleanings 
xxxxxx the new hay is soft xxx so soft... xxx a pleasant snooze 
xxxxxx the pony stretches xxx its mouth... xxx red persimmon leaves 
xxxxxx down it comes xxx with a frog rider... xxx the leaf 
xxxxxx fallen chestnuts, xxx the crow gets first xxx dibs 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx on tatami mats, gathering xxx chestnuts 
xxxxxx spotting wolf shit, xxx the grass xxx is so cold! 
xxxxxx even to my xxx biased eyes it's a cold xxx head! 
xxxxxx even to my xxx biased eyes it's a cold xxx shadow! 
xxxxxx pissing a perfect xxx circle... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx clang! bang! xxx this damned year, too xxx ends with a bell 
xxxxxx sunset's bell xxx finishes it off... xxx year's last day 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even on the year's last day xxx evening snow 
xxxxxx curling to sleep, xxx but first ending this year, too xxx with a toast 
xxxxxx cursing xxx the traveler... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx a blind child, xxx to his right, to his left xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx after pissing xxx rinsing the hands... xxx slanting winter rain 
xxxxxx even the pigeon xxx grumbles... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx caps it... xxx the piss pot 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx adds to the stack... xxx huts' firewood 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx "a b c d e f..." xxx she practices 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx and now a temple xxx pilgrimage 
xxxxxx dark night, xxx the first snowflakes xxx hit my neck 
xxxxxx snow falling, xxx a dog passes through xxx the temple's great gate 
xxxxxx to the rhythm xxx of the blizzard xxx washing rice 
xxxxxx going nuts in hailstones xxx crashing down... xxx a fox 
xxxxxx in the pockets xxx in the sleeves... xxx hailstones! 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx a flawless little patch... xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx my proxy bathes xxx in the cold water... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx soot sweeping, xxx toward the rising sun i aim xxx my nostrils 
xxxxxx from the great bronze xxx buddha's nose... xxx soot-sweeping 
xxxxxx a chubby girl xxx offered pickles... xxx soot sweeping 
xxxxxx dimly seen xxx in the dawn light... xxx a sooty face 
xxxxxx edo's world, xxx women also xxx are twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx slipping so skillfully... xxx a twelfth month singer 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers, xxx their butts facing xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx performing xxx behind a waterfall... xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even for a palm-sized rice cake xxx a commotion 
xxxxxx flat rice cake, xxx a child uses it xxx as a big fan 
xxxxxx world at peace, xxx even at a shack in a burnt field xxx a rice cake commotion 
xxxxxx in a stand of trees xxx pounding rice cakes... xxx evening moon 
xxxxxx yamanote, xxx slurping coarse tea xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx slipping on xxx the demon-expelling beans... xxx crying child 
xxxxxx lugging his snow sled xxx up the slope... xxx little child 
xxxxxx at iozaki xxx pheasants rise and go... xxx charcoal bags 
xxxxxx in the mud xxx trampled so quickly... xxx empty charcoal bag 
xxxxxx empty charcoal bag, xxx in the mud so quickly xxx trampled 
xxxxxx entrusting it to young folk xxx i sleep... xxx cozy wood fire 
xxxxxx singing to the dawn xxx the plovers too... xxx shubi pine 
xxxxxx trampling the bridge watchman's xxx kettle lid... xxx a singing plover 
xxxxxx plume grass flowers xxx scatters, it's grown cold xxx i see 
xxxxxx my thought xxx the tree would never wither xxx was wrong 
xxxxxx remembering how it was xxx with yearning... xxx bare winter plum 
xxxxxx remembering how it was xxx with yearning... xxx bare winter plum 
xxxxxx my thought xxx the tree would never wither xxx was wrong 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx the crow respects xxx his parents 
xxxxxx rotten cherry tree xxx what prayer brought you xxx out-of-season blooms? 
xxxxxx joining the samurai's xxx company... xxx sir dog 
xxxxxx first month, xxx tonight a night xxx of plum blossoms 
xxxxxx first month, xxx a row of clogs for rent xxx on the shady hillside 
xxxxxx the nightingale's song xxx wonderfully strange... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx my ramshackle hut, xxx just as it is... xxx spring begins 
xxxxxx my "happy new year!" xxx about average... xxx my spring 
xxxxxx new spring xxx yataro is reborn... xxx into haiku temple 
xxxxxx now spring has come xxx for sure... xxx tobacco tray 
xxxxxx from the storehouse xxx shining slantwise... xxx year's first sun 
xxxxxx sticking my cane xxx in the mud... xxx the year's first dawn 
xxxxxx westward he prays xxx to the year's first sky... xxx priest 
xxxxxx the year's first rain, xxx my grass roof's xxx first leak 
xxxxxx with snow falling xxx the night thief must follow his nose too... xxx new year's walk 
xxxxxx hanging from xxx st. jizo's neck... xxx a new year's decoration 
xxxxxx two or three xxx hang in the thicket... xxx new year's ropes 
xxxxxx another year xxx hanging the new year's rope... xxx wrinkled face 
xxxxxx for laughing grandchildren xxx on new year's day... xxx presents! 
xxxxxx his head of white hair xxx perks up... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even for the cat xxx a new year's gift 
xxxxxx night watchman, xxx from his window he hurls xxx new year's gifts 
xxxxxx looking, looking xxx at the mandarin orange... xxx year's first calligraphy 
xxxxxx the little boy xxx uses a cane... xxx new year's first writing 
xxxxxx swish, swish xxx writing with my cane... xxx year's first calligraphy 
xxxxxx in the naughty child's xxx palm first, a brush... xxx new year's writing 
xxxxxx bathing in the xxx new year's water... xxx my proxy the crow 
xxxxxx three pennies of new year's xxx water is enough... xxx little hut 
xxxxxx calling his parents xxx while his kite rises! xxx little pilgrim 
xxxxxx mama's way xxx of shaping rice cake offerings... xxx a lesson 
xxxxxx new year's tooth-hardening xxx meal... xxx yet toothless! 
xxxxxx laid out xxx at the hearth's door... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx mount asama's smoke xxx and the noon moon 
xxxxxx a mountain hot bath xxx slish-slosh... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx drawing eyebrows xxx on the white dog... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx a dog rolling xxx in the highway... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx at morning market xxx he bares his chest... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx even a horse xxx is the inn's guest... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx "we're off to see xxx the play," they say... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx a red hair string xxx in the rubbish heap... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx a lucky fox xxx deigns to come out... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx rice cake with bean paste xxx for the buddha of the thicket... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx in the spring breeze xxx a goose on a mission... xxx headstrong! 
xxxxxx hazy night, xxx people listening xxx to heavenly music 
xxxxxx the world today, xxx a bird sings xxx the lotus sutra 
xxxxxx looking back at my house xxx the mist xxx even mistier 
xxxxxx looking back at her house xxx just mist... xxx i depart, i depart 
xxxxxx lovers parting, xxx looking back at her house xxx until only mist 
xxxxxx leaving the houseboat xxx behind me, behind me xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx looking at my gate xxx the mist xxx even mistier 
xxxxxx don't want to remember it xxx or see it... xxx cover my house, mist! 
xxxxxx misty day, xxx a hush in the big xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx even their white walls xxx are slandered! xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx the call to morning tea xxx a clap in the mist 
xxxxxx riding sidesaddle xxx one by one... xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx squirming xxx amid the heat shimmers xxx people 
xxxxxx squirming xxx through the blossoms... xxx people 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx wooden clogs on his hands xxx at zenko temple 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx someone's thrown-out garbage xxx for sale 
xxxxxx lovely, xxx in the leftover snow xxx both handprints 
xxxxxx cooking pots bottoms up xxx dry in a row... xxx snow is melting 
xxxxxx olden times, xxx two handprints worth xxx of leftover snow 
xxxxxx at the gate xxx children dig a channel... xxx river of melting snow 
xxxxxx in the thicket xxx snow melts easily... xxx smoke 
xxxxxx snow is melting! xxx the pine tree behind xxx the inn 
xxxxxx snowy road, xxx on one side melts xxx to darkness 
xxxxxx helping to rake xxx the rice-seedling bed... xxx horse and pony 
xxxxxx a little tiresome xxx these blooming flowers... xxx the buddha sleeps 
xxxxxx even lying down xxx he's buddha! xxx shower of blossoms 
xxxxxx buddha's death-day xxx a bird too, sings lotus sutra! xxx lotus sutra! 
xxxxxx the buddha xxx even lying down, showered xxx with blossoms and coins 
xxxxxx fox festival night, xxx snow falling xxx on the bonfire 
xxxxxx fox festival, xxx the non-divine foxes xxx crying 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx the non-divine foxes xxx crying 
xxxxxx a studded palanquin xxx for the migrating servant... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even the cat gets a dose xxx of burning wormwood 
xxxxxx in one corner xxx soot-covered dolls... xxx husband and wife 
xxxxxx a soot-covered doll xxx but displayed in the seat xxx of honor 
xxxxxx the clay doll xxx shaded by blossoms... xxx hermit 
xxxxxx even the clay doll xxx is decked with flowers... xxx festival 
xxxxxx blossom world, xxx even in a temple's cherry grove xxx the doll festival 
xxxxxx landing plop! on all fours xxx on the shelf of dolls... xxx kitten 
xxxxxx even for a doll xxx made from black muck... xxx the same festival 
xxxxxx though my doll of clay xxx is homemade... xxx girls' festival 
xxxxxx in the herb cake pan xxx also kneading in xxx a prayer 
xxxxxx fires on the mountain, xxx look like buddhas xxx look like devils 
xxxxxx fires on the mountain xxx make it pretty at night... xxx shinano river 
xxxxxx crunch! crunch! xxx plowing the rice field xxx snow 
xxxxxx at the verge xxx of mount asama's smoke... xxx a farmer's field 
xxxxxx plowing the field, xxx a child crawls through xxx horsetails 
xxxxxx come and play xxx with me... xxx orphan sparrow 
xxxxxx a troop of children xxx march behind her... xxx mother sparrow 
xxxxxx are you calling xxx for your stepchild? xxx evening sparrow 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx pitifully, pitifully wet xxx he cries 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx in the middle of the river xxx cries for mama 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx in the middle of the river xxx cries for mama 
xxxxxx baby sparrows xxx move aside! xxx sir horse passes 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, baby sparrows xxx play together xxx gently! 
xxxxxx world of corruption xxx but a bird still sings xxx the lotus sutra 
xxxxxx are those nightingales xxx brothers? xxx identical voices! 
xxxxxx in the nightingale's honor xxx sweeping off xxx the fence 
xxxxxx a nightingale's shadow xxx singing... xxx bright window 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx sizes it up, singing... xxx my house 
xxxxxx even among nightingales xxx royalty xxx and bumpkins 
xxxxxx hey nightingale, xxx no men allowed xxx in the harem! 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx where a bird sings xxx the lotus sutra 
xxxxxx one by one they come xxx off-key nightingales xxx to my fence 
xxxxxx missing home, xxx an off-key nightingale's xxx faraway song 
xxxxxx waiting for the swallows xxx pounding bean-paste... xxx mountain's foot 
xxxxxx darkness settles xxx over a tiny isle of pines... xxx a skylark singing 
xxxxxx island of pines, xxx while mist turns dark xxx a skylark singing 
xxxxxx circling the thicket xxx that hides her children... xxx a lark sings 
xxxxxx riding sidesaddle xxx on horse after horse... xxx an evening lark 
xxxxxx three times 'round xxx the little shrine... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx rising early xxx will you stop at senju town? xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx mimicking me striking fire xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx squatting low xxx eye to eye... xxx with the frog 
xxxxxx locked in a staring contest xxx me... xxx and a frog 
xxxxxx looks like the boss xxx in the seat of honor... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx frogs croaking, xxx "there goes fox's bride! xxx fox's bride!" 
xxxxxx the wagtail beats time xxx with his butt... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx as long as you're singing xxx go ahead, dance! xxx frog 
xxxxxx mokubo temple's bell xxx fills him with filial piety... xxx the frog 
xxxxxx sporting with xxx the big cat's tail... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx from the weeds xxx that little butterfly xxx is born! 
xxxxxx in the trash heap xxx that little butterfly xxx is born! 
xxxxxx the butterfly's xxx soft landing... xxx in the tea kettle! 
xxxxxx flitting butterfly, xxx every corner of my hut xxx is inspected 
xxxxxx rubbing binzuru's xxx holy nose... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx grass by the gate, xxx soon as it sprouts xxx it's plucked 
xxxxxx among the sprouts xxx not one man-stabbing xxx blade of grass 
xxxxxx people with fans, xxx no stabbing grass xxx in sight 
xxxxxx keeping bamboo shoots xxx company, weeds xxx fresh green too 
xxxxxx baby grass, xxx a troop of little pilgrims xxx visit kitano 
xxxxxx the nine-ring flower xxx blooms only four or five xxx then quits 
xxxxxx radish in the field, xxx sir whiskers xxx yanks it up 
xxxxxx the plum blossom theif's xxx round head's xxx shadow 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent xxx even in the little thicket xxx first class 
xxxxxx plum blooming, xxx muddy straw sandals xxx and a sake cup 
xxxxxx here's a plum blossom xxx steal it! xxx bright moon 
xxxxxx are you pointing out xxx these plum blossoms for stealing, xxx moon? 
xxxxxx oyodo town, xxx plum blossoms the colors xxx of dawn 
xxxxxx a "no men allowed" sign xxx on the gate... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx my cracked teacup xxx like buddha on display... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the barrier guard's xxx wormwood burn sores in vogue... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx a little child dressed xxx like a shinto priest... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx one dip in the dye xxx renews zenko temple... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx deep in the thicket xxx an offering box... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx remote village, xxx a stroke of rare luck xxx these plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx world of pain, xxx and blossoms blooming xxx add to it! 
xxxxxx world of pain, xxx and the cherry blossoms xxx add to it! 
xxxxxx a baby boy xxx cries for milk... xxx blossoms at their peak 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms scatter, xxx the ignorant masses xxx of these latter days 
xxxxxx cherry blossom shade, xxx no one an utter xxx stranger 
xxxxxx thanks to cherry blossoms xxx no one an utter xxx stranger 
xxxxxx he wants his hole xxx in the world of blossoms... xxx fox 
xxxxxx the mountain moon xxx gives the blossom thief xxx light 
xxxxxx world of pain, xxx and the cherry blossoms xxx add to it! 
xxxxxx world of pain, xxx and blossoms blooming xxx add to it! 
xxxxxx "cherry blossoms! cherry blossoms!" xxx they sang xxx under this old tree 
xxxxxx a bevy of teahouses xxx suddenly! xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx a bevy of teahouses xxx built overnight! xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx amida buddha watches xxx them scatter... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx for the mountain field xxx mulch is falling... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx evening cherry blossoms, xxx people listening xxx to heavenly music 
xxxxxx the world today, xxx a bird sings xxx the lotus sutra 
xxxxxx "take a shortcut xxx through the hedge!" xxx the willow suggests 
xxxxxx standing within xxx the green willow... xxx a warrior woman 
xxxxxx waving at the entrance xxx the friendly xxx willow 
xxxxxx smack in the middle xxx of edo's very heart... xxx a willow 
xxxxxx willow at the gate, xxx i part it with my head xxx going in 
xxxxxx the willow xxx like a white cat... xxx a temple flower too 
xxxxxx the willow xxx like a gray cat... xxx a temple flower too 
xxxxxx shrouding his rear xxx as he poops in the field... xxx a willow 
xxxxxx stirred by people's voices xxx the greening xxx willow 
xxxxxx with one gust xxx it becomes the perfect xxx willow 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx refusing to droop... xxx the willow 
xxxxxx from the doorway on xxx a sixth month night xxx of moon 
xxxxxx in all of sixth month xxx not one good moon... xxx little hut 
xxxxxx sixth month, xxx for the moon's blessing xxx sweeping soot 
xxxxxx sixth month, xxx catching sight of the moon xxx sweeping soot 
xxxxxx short summer nights, xxx i've grown old enough xxx to love them 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx a new red flower xxx on the vine's tip 
xxxxxx ink-stained hands xxx sweaty face... xxx the child's calligraphy! 
xxxxxx hot day, xxx the foolish crow picks xxx at the eaves 
xxxxxx a hot night, xxx among bags and burdens xxx they sleep 
xxxxxx hot night, xxx bats dangle xxx at the river's edge 
xxxxxx the rice shoots xxx are grateful... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx here in rice country xxx the lucky, lucky xxx heat 
xxxxxx account book xxx for a pillow... xxx the summer heat 
xxxxxx looking hotter now xxx those mountains i came from... xxx lying down 
xxxxxx mount haku's snowcap xxx twinkling... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx so weary, xxx cool tree shade makes me xxx double back 
xxxxxx how many gateways xxx for the cool breeze? xxx pines and oaks 
xxxxxx in the cool air xxx slap! slap! his hair is combed... xxx sir horse 
xxxxxx in summer cool xxx the account book xxx for a pillow 
xxxxxx summer cool, xxx the gate to buddha's xxx pure land 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even the snow of shinano xxx for sale 
xxxxxx in summer cool air, xxx no incense xxx no farts 
xxxxxx rainy season over, xxx two houses, two neighbors xxx sweeping soot 
xxxxxx the last xxx of the fifth month rain... xxx drip, drip 
xxxxxx in this darkness xxx don't get your nose picked! xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx even the fifth month rain xxx takes a day off xxx today 
xxxxxx has the fifth month rain xxx taken a day off xxx today? 
xxxxxx maiden flowers looking xxx stuck-up... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx unknowingly wetting xxx an old man's sleeves... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx forgetting that today xxx is "the rain of the tiger"... xxx i'm drenched 
xxxxxx my hut, too xxx drenched by the tiger's xxx tears 
xxxxxx lying down in a row, xxx discussing xxx the distant storm 
xxxxxx growing to the beat xxx of the cloudburst... xxx weeds 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx monk-like on a rock, under a tree xxx a minor official 
xxxxxx on my sleeping mat xxx counting with my feet... xxx snowy peaks 
xxxxxx the ants' road xxx from peaks of clouds xxx to here 
xxxxxx thanks to the wind xxx they are precious... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx at the edge xxx of the mountain hermit's pillow... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx little mat... xxx in the tea kettle xxx a summer moon 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx beating the straw... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx a twice-fired sake xxx induced ruckus... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx in this remote place xxx is it saigyo's hut? xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx in this remote place xxx whose hut is it? xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx sluicing in xxx to fill the bath... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx letting pony drink xxx mother stands guard... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx the old mountain guard xxx prayed to find it... xxx trickle of pure water 
xxxxxx morning's first thing, xxx greedy eyes xxx on the green rice field 
xxxxxx this or that green rice field? xxx each farmer xxx is biased 
xxxxxx lying in a row, xxx he slanders his own xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, too xxx on buddha's birthday xxx report for duty 
xxxxxx through the long day xxx not a thirsty moment... xxx birthday buddha 
xxxxxx a flea xxx on the little plague god xxx floats away 
xxxxxx thrashing fish xxx knowing they're in a bucket xxx and not knowing 
xxxxxx relying on xxx the green willow's shade xxx cormorant flock 
xxxxxx outdoing the cormorant xxx in skillful imitation... xxx a child 
xxxxxx outdoing the cormorant xxx with a fine imitation... xxx a child 
xxxxxx cormorants and fishermen, xxx families xxx of three 
xxxxxx the mother cormorant xxx raising a ruckus.. xxx her child comes home 
xxxxxx baby comorant cries, xxx his mother returns xxx to the boat 
xxxxxx my favorite cormorant xxx again floats up xxx with an empty beak 
xxxxxx though sitting xxx in a new summer robe... xxx all alone 
xxxxxx cedar thatch xxx for the piss bucket... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx watch your head xxx on that gate! xxx summer kimono 
xxxxxx their hairstyles xxx long and short... xxx new summer kimonos 
xxxxxx a twelve-foot wooden sword xxx on their shoulders... xxx summer kimonos 
xxxxxx a thirty-foot wooden sword xxx on their shoulders... xxx summer kimonos 
xxxxxx kyoto night, xxx white summer kimonos xxx white umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx this wind xxx isn't enough, they say... xxx summer room 
xxxxxx pine tree shade, xxx one straw mat xxx my summer room 
xxxxxx no divine punishment yet, xxx napping xxx under the net 
xxxxxx even the horses xxx sleep in light green xxx mosquito nets! 
xxxxxx curling to sleep, xxx in the paper mosquito net's window xxx a sickle moon 
xxxxxx this body of dust xxx suits this wispy-soft xxx paper mosquito net 
xxxxxx wringing hands xxx in the mosquito netting... xxx let me have just a corner! 
xxxxxx the rising moon xxx in my paper mosquito net's window xxx passes by 
xxxxxx from the beginning xxx it has hung loose... xxx my paper mosquito net 
xxxxxx while i'm away xxx hang loose xxx paper mosquito net 
xxxxxx sleeping alone xxx building castles in the sky... xxx paper mosquito net 
xxxxxx upon inspection xxx it's covered with patches... xxx my mosquito net 
xxxxxx up to now xxx no divine punishment... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx no divine punishment yet, xxx napping xxx under the net 
xxxxxx with his elbows xxx on his abacus... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx with elbows propped xxx on his abacus... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx one foot propped xxx on the lotus leaves... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx after getting it xxx it's lost so soon... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx the little blind minstrel xxx wears it like a hat... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx how old xxx is this little pilgrim? xxx red paper fan 
xxxxxx the little pilgrim xxx being led by hand... xxx red paper fan 
xxxxxx the little pilgrim xxx being led by hand... xxx red paper fan 
xxxxxx how old xxx is this little pilgrim? xxx red paper fan 
xxxxxx the little boy xxx stows it in his neckband... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx he passes by xxx like taro kaja... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx picking flowers, xxx his paper fan stowed xxx behind his neck 
xxxxxx he stows his fan xxx behind his neck... xxx little boy 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx the little boy's name xxx on his fan 
xxxxxx great temple, xxx the little boy's name xxx on his fan 
xxxxxx placed to the windward xxx the prow's xxx smudge pot 
xxxxxx the fish xxx unaware of the bucket... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx even green grass xxx rustles only for money... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx a one-foot waterfall xxx splashes too... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx at dawn xxx after my second piss... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx even adding in xxx a thorn bush, behold! xxx a cool breeze 
xxxxxx dangling one leg xxx in paradise... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx a nightingale sings, xxx the east gate xxx of amida's pure land 
xxxxxx penniless xxx the green grass unnoticed... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx lighting my pipe xxx with an incense stick... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx banging the temple gong xxx just for fun... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx a doll is made xxx to bring my tea... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx one elbow xxx on a sleeping deer... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx mother, xxx while enjoying the cool air xxx stitching 
xxxxxx the stepchild's chore xxx in the cool air... xxx beating straw 
xxxxxx soaking in cold water xxx or hot, whichever... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx as evening falls xxx even above a sewer... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx the horse too xxx on rice-planting break... xxx field by the gate 
xxxxxx when your village is done xxx where next? xxx rice-planting umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx a foreigner watches xxx the rice planting too... xxx flutes and drums 
xxxxxx great japan, xxx a foreigner also attends xxx the year's end service! 
xxxxxx the fawn munches xxx lying on his side... xxx bush clover blooms 
xxxxxx leaping over xxx a sudden stream xxx mother deer looks back 
xxxxxx hearing people's voices xxx she hides her fawn... xxx the doe 
xxxxxx noisily demanding xxx a present... xxx the fawn 
xxxxxx in a hurry? xxx he's off to see kyoto xxx the cuckoo 
xxxxxx blossoming deutzia! xxx plum! cherry! xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx on a man-made hill xxx celebrating... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx sing at mr. toad's xxx funeral, hurry xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx the mountain cuckoo sings xxx at mr. toad's xxx funeral 
xxxxxx sing, cuckoo! xxx you're just about curing xxx my headache 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx "o flies and worms xxx listen well!" 
xxxxxx for my house xxx a suitable mountain cuckoo xxx sings his song 
xxxxxx "your praying for rain's xxx ridiculous!" xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx just when the calf xxx has fallen asleep... xxx the reed thrush sings 
xxxxxx just one reed xxx for the reed thrush... xxx take heart! 
xxxxxx more than enough xxx for priest issa... xxx one bag of coal 
xxxxxx are you predicting rain xxx in ten days xxx reed thrush? 
xxxxxx the spoonbill takes xxx a vow of silence... xxx reed thrush singing 
xxxxxx what delicateness! xxx a snake too sheds xxx his worldly robe 
xxxxxx temple grounds, xxx a snake too sheds xxx his worldly robe 
xxxxxx in the next life xxx don't be a snake! xxx temple grounds 
xxxxxx world of buddha's law, xxx the snake strips xxx his clothes 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx the toad xxx rubs his head 
xxxxxx looking like xxx "i can ride the mist"... xxx a toad 
xxxxxx looking like xxx "i can ride the mist"... xxx a crow 
xxxxxx with that mouth xxx he could vomit a cloud... xxx toad 
xxxxxx mister toad, xxx the wife may be waiting xxx your children crying 
xxxxxx a raindrop falls xxx he rubs his head... xxx toad 
xxxxxx "allow me to present myself, xxx i am the toad xxx of this thicket!" 
xxxxxx a big firefly xxx lightly, nimbly xxx passes by 
xxxxxx his chest heaving xxx he's chased indoors... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx seeking sanctuary xxx with a sigh of relief? xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx teasing us xxx two or three times... xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx first firefly xxx though the hand is skillful xxx slips free 
xxxxxx first firefly, xxx uncaught by the hand xxx flies free 
xxxxxx flitting firefly, xxx uncaught by the hand xxx uncaught again! 
xxxxxx though wrapped in xxx tissue paper... xxx a firefly's light 
xxxxxx toward people's voices xxx well, well! xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx firefly lights, xxx if you keep still xxx even on your head 
xxxxxx do you think my sleeve xxx is your parent? xxx fleeing firefly 
xxxxxx measured by an inchworm xxx too... xxx my house's pillar 
xxxxxx today too xxx mosquito larvae and me xxx at sunset 
xxxxxx today again xxx mosquito larvae... xxx tomorrow the same 
xxxxxx up to heaven xxx the mosquito larva flies... xxx sickle moon 
xxxxxx morning's mosquitoes, xxx behind amida buddha xxx they hide 
xxxxxx pesky mosquito, xxx into an old well xxx he sneaks 
xxxxxx to the lullaby xxx of mosquitoes xxx she sleeps 
xxxxxx a smattering of mosquitoes, xxx from today on xxx an old man's world 
xxxxxx this is cute too, xxx the year's first mosquito's xxx whiny voice 
xxxxxx making even the cherry tree xxx curse... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx the whining mosquito xxx also thinks i'm old... xxx edge of my ear 
xxxxxx from the direction xxx of "all praise to amida buddha!" xxx a mosquito's buzz 
xxxxxx a bedroom mosquito's xxx first buzz xxx in the flame 
xxxxxx a bedroom mosquito xxx poof! xxx in the flame 
xxxxxx one mosquito xxx perfectly quiet... xxx and relentless! 
xxxxxx first voice rising xxx in the evening sky... xxx a mosquito 
xxxxxx where the verandah fly xxx rubbed his hands... xxx swat! 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even my flies xxx are few 
xxxxxx fly on my umbrella-hat xxx from today on xxx a citizen of edo! 
xxxxxx the fly on my umbrella-hat xxx beats me xxx inside 
xxxxxx a lacquered tray, xxx whoops! xxx the fly slips 
xxxxxx one man, one fly xxx one large xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx my home village xxx where even the flies xxx bite deep 
xxxxxx it's a good world! xxx one more, help yourself xxx flies on my rice 
xxxxxx in a grassy meadow xxx she rubs them off... xxx cat's fleas 
xxxxxx don't jump flea! xxx that's sumida river xxx over there 
xxxxxx if you jump flea xxx jump xxx on the lotus 
xxxxxx until the winged ants xxx come out xxx a fortunate pillar 
xxxxxx "hey puppy xxx come here!" sings xxx a cicada 
xxxxxx a cicada chirrs, xxx the pinwheel so utterly xxx red 
xxxxxx first cicada xxx "look at the floating world! xxx look! loo-ook!" 
xxxxxx cicada in the pine xxx how much will you cry xxx till it's noon? 
xxxxxx a mountain cicada, xxx into my sleeve xxx he goes 
xxxxxx from deep in the temple gong xxx a chirring xxx cicada 
xxxxxx dayflowers, xxx even at the ancient priest's xxx window 
xxxxxx day flowers, xxx burn amid steaming xxx pebbles 
xxxxxx blowing his nose xxx on the moonflower... xxx a child 
xxxxxx measuring foot by foot xxx with a fan... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx scrap paper faces xxx of peonies... xxx shaded by leaves 
xxxxxx sitting on her eggs xxx the hen admires xxx the peony 
xxxxxx the god of fortune xxx and luck dwells here... xxx a peony! 
xxxxxx lucky, lucky xxx luckiest of flowers... xxx the peony! 
xxxxxx even the peony's xxx good karma wears thin... xxx my house! 
xxxxxx a temple xxx in the chinese style... xxx with peonies! 
xxxxxx blooming lotuses xxx in this world... xxx bent 
xxxxxx it's a better world, xxx but they're only penny-sized xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx even lotus blossoms xxx bend a bit... xxx oh floating world! 
xxxxxx transferred to my gate xxx the little lotus xxx blossom 
xxxxxx blooming pink, xxx two pennies' worth of water xxx for your bath 
xxxxxx the pink xxx in the shade of stepmother trees xxx blooms 
xxxxxx even the horse's xxx hair is done up... xxx irises 
xxxxxx this morning xxx one's in the trash... xxx irises 
xxxxxx on the blooming duckweed xxx let us ride... xxx to that cloud! 
xxxxxx in the horse's ladle xxx the duckweed suddenly xxx has bloomed! 
xxxxxx planted in the garden xxx of the secluded house... xxx leftover rice plants 
xxxxxx roadside, xxx even the horse won't eat xxx the leftover rice plants 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx using its pillar to thresh xxx the barley 
xxxxxx ripened barley, xxx with a child on her back xxx the sardine vendor 
xxxxxx a busy time, xxx even the mountain's moss xxx in full bloom 
xxxxxx the mountain moss xxx lends a hand xxx to the blooming 
xxxxxx red sacred rope, xxx the smallpox god's xxx crop of young bamboo 
xxxxxx a splendid, tall xxx young bamboo! xxx while i was away 
xxxxxx while i was away xxx just for a while... xxx a splendid young bamboo! 
xxxxxx while i was away xxx just for a while... xxx a splendid young bamboo! 
xxxxxx a splendid, tall xxx young bamboo! xxx while i was away 
xxxxxx well, well xxx pale purple, this year's color... xxx for young bamboo 
xxxxxx it's a good thing xxx being bitter bamboo... xxx fresh new shoots 
xxxxxx the thousand year xxx bamboo shoot... xxx snap! broken 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx if it weren't for people's "shoots" xxx you'd live to flower 
xxxxxx bitter bamboo shoots, xxx a lucky xxx assembly 
xxxxxx fancy sitting room, xxx even peeling melons xxx an ordeal 
xxxxxx first melon of the season xxx in her grasp... xxx sleeping child 
xxxxxx aligned xxx with the sickle moon... xxx the cooling melon 
xxxxxx holding it xxx against her cheek... xxx muskmelon 
xxxxxx a red leaf falls xxx showing off... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx making the lawn xxx a vacation spot... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx just one branch xxx helps my siesta... xxx summer tree 
xxxxxx the neighborhood's xxx relaxation spot... xxx the tree's deep shade 
xxxxxx amid deutzia blossoms xxx all alone... xxx a torii gate 
xxxxxx amid deutzia blossoms xxx all alone... xxx a shrine 
xxxxxx with deutzia blossoms xxx on this lucky day... xxx outhouse 
xxxxxx a deutzia shrub xxx even without blossoms... xxx for sale 
xxxxxx even the deutzia shrub xxx is moved to tears... xxx the toad's grave 
xxxxxx reflecting enough moonlight xxx to light my bedroom... xxx deutzia blossoms 
xxxxxx enough to see my bedroom xxx deutzia blossoms... xxx a moonlit night 
xxxxxx enough light xxx to light my bedroom... xxx deutzia blossoms 
xxxxxx first autumn morning, xxx a fever-curing xxx kind of sky 
xxxxxx a child writes xxx in the tray's ashes... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx brushing away xxx the red horse's hard day... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx since the day i knew xxx the word "parent"... xxx cold nights 
xxxxxx since the day i knew xxx the word "parent"... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx our shameful shadows! xxx in the cold night walking xxx in vain 
xxxxxx moon! blossoms! xxx forty-nine years walking around xxx a waste 
xxxxxx shaking the empty keg xxx once again... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx "here's the outhouse!" xxx the horse calls... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx in the mood for loafing xxx and carousing... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx bowing to my home village xxx in my heart... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx bowing to my children xxx in my heart... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx the young folk xxx sleep together... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx sweeping dirt xxx off the horse's back... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx hugging his knees xxx his face at peace... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx walking on alone xxx i write on a wall... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx don't leave, geese! xxx wherever you live xxx it's autumn's dusk 
xxxxxx our shameful shadows! xxx in the long night walking xxx in vain 
xxxxxx autumn ends, xxx a man strokes away xxx his horse's troubles 
xxxxxx "gimme that harvest moon!" xxx cries the crying xxx child 
xxxxxx "gimme that moon!" xxx cries the crying xxx child 
xxxxxx guard my hut's key xxx pine tree! xxx going moon gazing 
xxxxxx a present for me, xxx moon gazing then locking xxx my hut 
xxxxxx the sake gone xxx time to buckle down xxx and moon-gaze 
xxxxxx buckwheat country's xxx sharp tongues cutting... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx in my home village xxx she guards our house... xxx moon gazing alone 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx draws close... xxx hole in the wall 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx fifty-seven years xxx of traveling autumns 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx she'd crawl to my dinner tray xxx if my child were here 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx my lap would be a pillow xxx if my child were here 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx my lap would be a pillow xxx if my child were here 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx leaving my hut's key xxx with the pine 
xxxxxx little house xxx in a rice barn's shadow... xxx here too, moon gazing 
xxxxxx ishiyama, xxx a harvest moon eclipse xxx gazer 
xxxxxx eclipsed splendidly xxx as one would expect... xxx harvest moon 
xxxxxx an officious one, xxx the harvest moon eclipse xxx gazer 
xxxxxx boldy he forecasts xxx the moon's xxx full eclipse 
xxxxxx in a flash xxx the moon's sickness xxx is cured 
xxxxxx such is our world, xxx even the moon xxx gets sick! 
xxxxxx returning to us xxx the great harvest moon! xxx harvest moon! 
xxxxxx before the moon does, xxx the crowd of people xxx wanes 
xxxxxx before the moon does, xxx people's faces xxx wane 
xxxxxx voices in the dark, xxx yet this is the night xxx of harvest moon 
xxxxxx to the world of man xxx the moon deigns xxx to return 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even the moon xxx suffers! 
xxxxxx are you the harvest moon's xxx representative? xxx white rabbit 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx deigns to return... xxx floating world! 
xxxxxx ending the harvest moon xxx eclipse... xxx mountain rain 
xxxxxx such is our world, xxx even the moon xxx gets sick! 
xxxxxx in a flash xxx the moon's sickness xxx is cured 
xxxxxx the geese too xxx stuffing their bellies... xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx stuck in his winnow xxx chopsticks and a charm... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx stuck in his winnow xxx chopsticks and a charm... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the compass points xxx to my native mountains 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx red flowers she wanted xxx to pick 
xxxxxx pearls of dew, xxx even on my sleeves xxx rolling down 
xxxxxx a dewdrop pearl, xxx i pinched it into xxx a buddha 
xxxxxx trying to pinch xxx a bead of dew... xxx a child 
xxxxxx this world xxx is a dewdrop world xxx yes... but... 
xxxxxx dew from a lotus leaf xxx plenty xxx for morning tea 
xxxxxx on lotus leaves xxx this world's dewdrops xxx are warped 
xxxxxx on lotus leaves xxx this world's dewdrops xxx are bent 
xxxxxx across the dried river xxx lightning xxx flickers 
xxxxxx in the lightning flash xxx rubbing his head... xxx toad 
xxxxxx in flashes of lightning xxx crossing the shaky xxx bridge 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx lying in a row at the gate xxx happy faces 
xxxxxx lightning, xxx streak by streak xxx cures the world 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx even on a one-penny bridge xxx mist rises 
xxxxxx night mist, xxx the horse remembers xxx the bridge's hole 
xxxxxx writing the poem xxx on the mulberry substitute... xxx leaf of a loofah 
xxxxxx the eaves xxx of the holy man's hut... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx out-dazzling xxx the harvest moon... xxx fireworks! 
xxxxxx a wind-break xxx for the nursing child... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx a rainy evening, xxx my next-door neighbor xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx night rain, xxx my next door neighbor's xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx setting a lantern xxx in the field... xxx someone pounding cloth 
xxxxxx hanging a lantern xxx in the pine... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx under the tree xxx tea is brewing... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx a night for pounding xxx the love-making clothes... xxx hut's stone 
xxxxxx under the cloth-pounding xxx mallet... xxx yoshino river 
xxxxxx a crying deer xxx yearns for its mother... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx clink-clonk xxx the one pounding cloth xxx is mother 
xxxxxx an owl hooting xxx to the beat... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx kasuga field, xxx penny candy mingles xxx with deer poop 
xxxxxx hanging from the buck's xxx antler... xxx a hand-lamp 
xxxxxx young bucks, xxx even those born this year xxx autumn voices 
xxxxxx grandfather buck xxx searching for a sleeping place xxx calls out 
xxxxxx grandfather buck xxx testing the depth... xxx flash flood river 
xxxxxx mother dog xxx testing the depth... xxx snow-melt river 
xxxxxx the deer's flute playing xxx off-key... xxx song in the night 
xxxxxx at the shrine xxx a buck, too, prays xxx to have a child 
xxxxxx with buddha's peace xxx gazing at red leaves... xxx mr. and mrs. deer 
xxxxxx glaring at the high verandah xxx he barks... xxx the buck 
xxxxxx hiding xxx the singing deer's face... xxx torii gate 
xxxxxx don't cry deer! xxx the willow tree only looks xxx like snakes 
xxxxxx don't carry off xxx my haiku collection! xxx deer at my hut 
xxxxxx the lazy buck xxx croons his mating call xxx lying down 
xxxxxx listen well xxx to that off-key flute! xxx cry of a deer 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx on the verandah xxx a deer cries 
xxxxxx as evening falls xxx he stands among the deer... xxx face of the holy man 
xxxxxx the woodpecker knocks it xxx for practice... xxx the post 
xxxxxx the woodpecker xxx sizes it up... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx is the woodpecker xxx stopping to listen too? xxx evening's wooden drum 
xxxxxx a talented one xxx posed on one foot... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx calling a big gang xxx down to join them... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx come down, wild goose! xxx plan your landing xxx at my feet 
xxxxxx trying out xxx standing on one leg... xxx goose on a post 
xxxxxx goose at the gate xxx standing on one leg... xxx deep meditation 
xxxxxx geese and ducks xxx unaware of the august presence... xxx peaceful faces 
xxxxxx you too, wild geese xxx all day, into the night xxx must travel 
xxxxxx lone wild goose, xxx fly night after night xxx on your way 
xxxxxx tonight like old times xxx at mokubo temple... xxx geese in the reeds 
xxxxxx chased away xxx from the village of people... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx no matter how often xxx they're chased from the village... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx don't quarrel xxx stick together! xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx no matter how often xxx they're chased from the village... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx chased away xxx from the village of people... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx flying through hoops xxx titmice xxx through the trees 
xxxxxx pointing xxx at the fart bug... xxx laughing buddha 
xxxxxx the cricket hops xxx atop the winnowing fan's xxx dust pile 
xxxxxx a katydid xxx in the scarecrow's gut xxx singing 
xxxxxx the praying mantis's xxx brave chest, half an inch... xxx look! 
xxxxxx night after night xxx accompanying the cool air... xxx earthworms sing 
xxxxxx "get your sardines!" xxx she cries, a crying baby xxx on her back 
xxxxxx from the well xxx a breeze of japan! xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the sect founder xxx is great basho... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum garden, xxx we walk with little xxx sake cups 
xxxxxx wielding his hoe xxx with a face like shinno's... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx no drinking at this hut xxx that's a flaw... xxx but such chrysanthemums! 
xxxxxx if you were small, chrysanthemum xxx there'd be no shame xxx of shackles! 
xxxxxx happy and peaceful xxx they bloom... xxx the riffraff mums 
xxxxxx happily they've bloomed xxx though they took their time... xxx wild mums 
xxxxxx happy and peaceful xxx they bloom... xxx the riffraff mums 
xxxxxx the waste paper basket xxx smells of sake... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx with the tip of his cane xxx he points and lectures... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx the priest has a towel xxx wrapped 'round his head... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx curled asleep xxx side-by-side, a gourd xxx a chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx the thicket's chrysanthemum xxx blooms xxx in secret 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx among the provisions xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx peacefully asleep xxx it has bloomed... xxx nameless chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx lazy, lazy! i water it xxx not even with dewdrops... xxx my chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx like me xxx getting plenty of sleep... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx rented to the blooming xxx morning-glories... xxx my eaves 
xxxxxx a school for praising xxx buddha... xxx my hut's ivy 
xxxxxx dropping from xxx the young buck's mouth xxx bush clover blossoms 
xxxxxx the arrowroot vine xxx holds on tight... xxx a post 
xxxxxx the nondrinker's hut xxx is an eyesore... xxx blooming orchids 
xxxxxx the horse doesn't hardly xxx bend his neck... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx stretching its neck xxx the rice-loaded horse xxx passes 
xxxxxx the dragonfly too xxx folds hands in prayer... xxx rice blossoms 
xxxxxx never giving up xxx my field rustles too... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx evening moon, xxx on the harvested rice xxx a bottle of sake 
xxxxxx offering a prayer xxx to amida buddha... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx holding it xxx against her cheek... xxx the red persimmon 
xxxxxx an acorn strikes xxx the bell xxx of evil 
xxxxxx from the treetop xxx the monkey points out xxx the mushrooms 
xxxxxx for five or six people xxx only one... xxx mushroom hunting 
xxxxxx for the baby monkey xxx a nip of sake... xxx mushroom hunting 
xxxxxx for the traveling child xxx a nip of sake... xxx mushroom hunting 
xxxxxx for the traveling child xxx a nip of sake... xxx mushroom hunting 
xxxxxx for the baby monkey xxx a nip of sake... xxx mushroom hunting 
xxxxxx the mushroom hunters xxx return empty-handed... xxx fussing 
xxxxxx snowflakes flitting down, xxx a winter solstice xxx celebration 
xxxxxx for one penny xxx one hit on the prayer gong... xxx how cold it is! 
xxxxxx merely the sight xxx of wolf shit... xxx how cold it is! 
xxxxxx the old banner xxx flaps in a thicket xxx in the cold 
xxxxxx "a starling from the sticks!" xxx he taunts... xxx how cold it is 
xxxxxx evening's glow, xxx the deep, deep red xxx first ice 
xxxxxx at the tip of the pole xxx paper flapping... xxx a spring day in winter 
xxxxxx come what may xxx trusting in the buddha xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx paying no heed xxx to the year's last day... xxx a floating bird, asleep 
xxxxxx evening mountain, xxx the color of buckwheat noodles xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx the child rides piggyback xxx across the river... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx the bird of karma xxx circles the trap... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx the little blind child xxx is overrun... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx a blind child, xxx to his right, to his left xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx night of winter rain, xxx the cries of a deer xxx without a child 
xxxxxx the servant beats xxx his wooden drum... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx the deaf and dumb beggar xxx beats his bowl 
xxxxxx in the box xxx four or five mon... xxx night of winter rain 
xxxxxx joining the "starlings" xxx a night of winter xxx rain 
xxxxxx "a starling from the sticks" xxx i'm called... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx winter wind on samusa bridge, xxx a samurai's servant xxx goes home 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx a voice from nowhere calls xxx the blind masseur 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx the frozen north xxx draws near 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx a twenty-four mon xxx whorehouse 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx on the vacant house xxx a painted devil 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx riding a packhorse xxx through the dust 
xxxxxx a dumping ground xxx for the first snow... xxx my backyard 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx i take down my indoor xxx slippers 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx soon to be boiled xxx the playful pig 
xxxxxx my house's rear wall, xxx the dirty snow xxx holds on 
xxxxxx snow flitting down, xxx the sky over shinano xxx isn't joking 
xxxxxx fall, snow! xxx my poor sake bottle xxx is dry 
xxxxxx fall, hailstones, fall! xxx one in grandchild's xxx long-lobed ear 
xxxxxx young bucks xxx licking each other... xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx offering my hut xxx to the watchman... xxx night frost 
xxxxxx to the west xxx is buddha's paradise... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx winter prayers, xxx a cutpurse, too xxx in moonlight 
xxxxxx in a crossroads temple xxx he claps alone... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx he lets me cross xxx his field... xxx night of winter prayers 
xxxxxx he lets me pass xxx through the gap in the fence... xxx night of winter prayers 
xxxxxx he lets me pass xxx through the gap in the fence... xxx night of winter prayers 
xxxxxx he lets me cross xxx his field... xxx night of winter prayers 
xxxxxx for festive jelly too xxx the venerable twelfth day... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx midwinter bathers, xxx on their backs posters xxx of dragons 
xxxxxx winter voice drills, xxx for this, too xxx all praise to amida buddha! 
xxxxxx rainy night, xxx yet she chants winter prayers xxx nonetheless 
xxxxxx one by one xxx don't the pennies drop? xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx rolling xxx with the bamboo soot-broom xxx the cat gambols 
xxxxxx no one to help xxx with the soot sweeping... xxx my tears 
xxxxxx accompanied by the cat xxx i hide it by the pine... xxx swept soot 
xxxxxx parents acting xxx like little kids... xxx twelfth month singers! 
xxxxxx the twelfth month singers xxx return from afar... xxx temple gate 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx a box of old charms xxx on my back 
xxxxxx one for the dog xxx one for the crow... xxx rice cakes 
xxxxxx "the rice cake man xxx is next door!" xxx the child announces 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx the altar's god of wealth xxx beams a smile 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes, xxx even the god of wealth xxx watches eagerly 
xxxxxx not reaching my place, xxx the sound xxx of rice cake pounding 
xxxxxx to my gate xxx he seemed to be coming... xxx neighbor with rice cakes 
xxxxxx burdening my child's xxx back... xxx rice cakes for the neighbors 
xxxxxx stop pestering! xxx rice cakes are growing xxx on willow branches 
xxxxxx all alone xxx babbling idiocies... xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx hill behind my home xxx at least ten places... xxx they drink away the year 
xxxxxx the cat joins xxx the party... xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx kyoto, xxx even under bridges xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx my house, xxx all by myself xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even in a thicket xxx a year's end fair 
xxxxxx the child's only three xxx but gets his share... xxx lucky beans 
xxxxxx protection from demons xxx and wild samurai... xxx lucky holly 
xxxxxx after today xxx a new year begins! xxx the color of barley 
xxxxxx from now on xxx children's voices... xxx "demons be gone!" 
xxxxxx one shout xxx and this world's demons xxx should flee 
xxxxxx my country, xxx even the children xxx chase off demons 
xxxxxx ashamed, xxx i present myself to edo xxx a year older 
xxxxxx he drives out devils xxx for a coin... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx patched xxx with old wastepaper xxx my winter coat 
xxxxxx the cat breaks it in xxx sharpening claws... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx imperial palace, xxx in kyoto even cats xxx have futons! 
xxxxxx no good deeds xxx but also no sins... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx getting better at eating xxx foul food 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx becoming expert at eating xxx foul food 
xxxxxx charcoal fire, xxx morning's celebration xxx of coughing 
xxxxxx our treasured child xxx shrieks with laughter... xxx a cozy wood fire 
xxxxxx the war lord's wood fire xxx rises xxx first 
xxxxxx the provincial lord's xxx is first to rise... xxx wood fire 
xxxxxx turning my back xxx to the wood fire... xxx saimyo temple 
xxxxxx the season's first xxx pufferfish soup smoke... xxx house on the hill 
xxxxxx making its living xxx slyly xxx the wren 
xxxxxx joining the throng xxx of sparrows xxx a little wren 
xxxxxx begging her to play xxx her samisen... xxx plovers 
xxxxxx if i just whisper xxx the flock of plovers xxx rises at once 
xxxxxx grasses that stay hidden xxx grasses that don't... xxx the same withering 
xxxxxx familiar grasses xxx and unfamiliar... xxx the same withering 
xxxxxx standing at a six-way xxx crossroads... xxx withered grasses 
xxxxxx morning after morning xxx one by one... xxx yanking radishes 
xxxxxx temple nuns, xxx it takes two xxx yanking the radish 
xxxxxx yanking a radish xxx taking a tumble... xxx little boy 
xxxxxx the rejects tossed xxx in the overgrown field... xxx radishes 
xxxxxx a fistful xxx spread out for the keg... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx with a fistful xxx giving the keg a wipe... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx a straw fire sputters xxx out 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx catching sight of me xxx he hits his gong 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx whitewash peeling off xxx the mud dumpling 
xxxxxx lazy, xxx leaving blossoms and moon xxx for tomorrow 
xxxxxx which one of those xxx tame cranes xxx will the arrow hit? 
xxxxxx don't want to see it xxx don't want to, still... xxx there's my house! 
xxxxxx don't want to remember it xxx or see it, still xxx there's my house! 
xxxxxx from this year on xxx clear profit... xxx this corrupt world's sky 
xxxxxx from this year on xxx clear profit, carousing xxx in this world 
xxxxxx north country, xxx but on my hut a snowless xxx first month 
xxxxxx first rain, xxx a typical north country xxx new year's 
xxxxxx the roadside's dirt xxx a wonder to behold... xxx first month 
xxxxxx in amida buddha xxx trusting... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx the nightingale comes xxx with his shadow... xxx spring window 
xxxxxx with the new spring xxx tasty sea plants on the beach... xxx a thousand ages 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx two households xxx one house 
xxxxxx i swear it's xxx looking big! xxx the year's first sun 
xxxxxx a big rain, xxx early new year's day xxx it falls 
xxxxxx sprinkled in xxx with the new year's rain... xxx flitting snow 
xxxxxx welcome to my house! xxx first month's very first xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx utterly soaked xxx by the year's first rain... xxx little house 
xxxxxx plum blooming, xxx even hell's gate xxx closed 
xxxxxx today even the xxx hordes of hell celebrate xxx the new year 
xxxxxx even on a fast day xxx this world's hell xxx is hell 
xxxxxx men have plucked xxx little pines a thousand ages... xxx they must hate us! 
xxxxxx how to ladel mama's xxx lucky tea... xxx a lesson 
xxxxxx at fukugawa xxx yelling across the river... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx a pretty kite soars xxx a beggar's shack xxx below 
xxxxxx a beggar child xxx walking and flying xxx a kite 
xxxxxx stretching out xxx toward the first snow... xxx lion puppet's head 
xxxxxx taking their leave xxx in the flowery third month... xxx radishes 
xxxxxx spring has sprung, xxx but in every thicket, snow xxx and more snow! 
xxxxxx spring peace, xxx a mouse licking up xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the crow, too xxx yawns and yawns... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx leading a cow xxx from the dark barn... xxx days grow longer 
xxxxxx long day, xxx the cow's slobber xxx about two miles long 
xxxxxx chanting "praise buddha!" xxx for a fee... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx "praise buddha!" xxx chanted for a fee... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx morning's first thing, xxx on praying hands xxx the spring rain 
xxxxxx in deep mountains too xxx it's a gambler's world! xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx crossing the hanging bridge xxx singing a song... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx incense smoke, xxx inner peace temple xxx in the spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx in my lover's sleeve xxx coins jingle 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx a child gives a dance lesson xxx to the cat 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx crossing the two-penny bridge xxx in vain 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx it doesn't fall at once xxx the spring rain 
xxxxxx the puppy has caught xxx a mouse... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx the spring breeze xxx stubbornly cold... xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx two samurai xxx attend the dog 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx on the fence a pair xxx of red sandals 
xxxxxx one hotel runner xxx is a woman... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx an east wind blows, xxx the dog lays his chin xxx on the bank 
xxxxxx his attendants behind xxx haul the mist... xxx lord kaga 
xxxxxx dragged in xxx by the pheasant's tail... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx knowing the bell xxx rings away life... xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx out of heat shimmers xxx taking shape... xxx my hick province 
xxxxxx the goddess of spring xxx missed a few spots... xxx mottled mountain 
xxxxxx what a shame, xxx cheating fate for the moment xxx leftover snow 
xxxxxx herons, crows, sparrows xxx all enjoying xxx the water's warmth 
xxxxxx plowing the rice-seedling bed xxx 'round and around... xxx horse and pony 
xxxxxx dead flowers suddenly xxx are made to bloom... xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx joining in xxx we curl to sleep too... xxx reclining buddha 
xxxxxx in honor of the equinox xxx crawling into my sleeve... xxx a louse 
xxxxxx visiting the temple xxx for the showing of the image... xxx sparrow families 
xxxxxx they carry him xxx to the spring blossoms... xxx buddha 
xxxxxx cherry tree, xxx ensconced among blossoms xxx the hermit doll 
xxxxxx they must have kids, xxx herbs at the gate xxx for herb cakes 
xxxxxx all the way xxx to the blue sky's edge... xxx low tide 
xxxxxx acting like people xxx pigeons and sparrows xxx at low tide 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx in the shrine's garden xxx low tide shell-gathering 
xxxxxx tea leaves picked xxx and pines trimmed... xxx house on the hill 
xxxxxx a candle standing xxx on the rock... xxx grafting the branch 
xxxxxx his toothless mouth xxx holds it... xxx the branch for grafting 
xxxxxx in an ephemeral world xxx at an ephemeral house's gate... xxx grafting a branch 
xxxxxx frightened off xxx retracing his steps... xxx the love-crazed cat 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the wild cat's route xxx for prowling 
xxxxxx smitten cat, xxx a case of love-madness xxx it seems 
xxxxxx tethered now xxx how he snores... xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx the barrier guard xxx scolds him in passing... xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx the gatekeeper xxx opens up... xxx for the lover cat 
xxxxxx dirty, yes xxx but the cat xxx has a wife 
xxxxxx the antler xxx that the big buck shed... xxx my pillow 
xxxxxx the buck shedding antlers xxx pokes his belly... xxx mountain priest 
xxxxxx embarrassed xxx that he's shed his horns... xxx mountain buck 
xxxxxx moonrise over western mountains, xxx the buck xxx sheds his antlers 
xxxxxx look you goblins! xxx the buck has shed xxx his horns 
xxxxxx surrendering it xxx to the nesting birds... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx in vain xxx the baby bird begs... xxx a stepchild 
xxxxxx sparrows at the gate, xxx a quarrel between brothers xxx breaks out 
xxxxxx "baby sparrow's xxx a sissy!" xxx playing with the girls 
xxxxxx a nightingale sings, xxx the east gate xxx of amida's pure land 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx "from here to the west xxx your hut's territory!" 
xxxxxx borrowing the buck's xxx back, the pheasant xxx cries 
xxxxxx hiding in the field xxx buddha's sleeve xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx parents and child xxx three in a row... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx three times 'round xxx karasaki... xxx departing geese 
xxxxxx even the turtle xxx wants feathers... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx in the dark night, too xxx finding their way... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx like giving birth xxx with that belly! xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx at edo river xxx even among frogs... xxx rude talk 
xxxxxx at edo river xxx a lot of rude talk... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx even the nettle tree xxx dressed for spring... xxx croaking frogs 
xxxxxx frogs, xxx over my hand fanning a fuse xxx they hop 
xxxxxx in his regular seat xxx for moon gazing... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx at edo river xxx a lot of rude talk... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx evening frog xxx what are you meditating on? xxx meditation bridge 
xxxxxx the butterfly i passed xxx two miles back xxx is ahead now 
xxxxxx the yellow gang xxx the white gang... xxx butterflies come out 
xxxxxx yellow gang, white gang xxx the butterflies claim xxx their turf 
xxxxxx i pity you xxx for following me xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx a shock xxx to the arriving butterfly xxx a fence 
xxxxxx white versus yellow, xxx the butterflies also xxx fight 
xxxxxx sedge mat, xxx look! look! butterflies xxx you've stained it 
xxxxxx foraging for food xxx in my thatched hut xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx first butterfly xxx don't get stained xxx on my straw mat! 
xxxxxx claiming xxx the big sake cup... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx my arm xxx for its pillow xxx the butterfly sleeps 
xxxxxx "silkworm doctor xxx silkworm doctor, hurry!" xxx little girl 
xxxxxx playing doctor xxx for the silkworms... xxx little girl 
xxxxxx "this way to the hut!" xxx the horsefly xxx flies 
xxxxxx single file on the road, xxx one horsefly xxx one me 
xxxxxx acting as guide xxx on the mountain road... xxx horsefly 
xxxxxx mountain road, xxx "this way, come! come!" xxx the horsefly flies 
xxxxxx the hornet too xxx knowing the eaves xxx returns 
xxxxxx my province, xxx even the grass blooms xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx at the edge xxx of a stinking well... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx on this wall xxx no vain writing allowed... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx fluttering their way xxx into my head... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx in his red hair xxx stowing his pipe... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx "there's some blossoms! xxx and over there!" xxx laughing buddha 
xxxxxx no divine punishment yet, xxx rain xxx of cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx no divine punishment yet, xxx napping xxx under the net 
xxxxxx father and son xxx go their separate ways... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx hair and beards xxx of comrades all white... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx the hairdos xxx of companions all white... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx on little straw mats xxx tired of the blossoms... xxx they snore 
xxxxxx one after another, xxx days in the blossoming xxx mountains 
xxxxxx he sneaks up xxx to my thatched hut xxx for blossom viewing 
xxxxxx treating my thatched hut xxx like home... xxx blossom viewers 
xxxxxx with a lantern xxx into the gap of blossom xxx clouds 
xxxxxx the distant mountain's xxx blossoms cast their light... xxx east window 
xxxxxx blossoms scatter, xxx in the shade of parasols xxx drunken revelry 
xxxxxx young folk beat us xxx to the spot! xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx the stone buddha xxx serves as a windbreak... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx edo's cherry blossoms, too xxx shine only xxx for money 
xxxxxx the spot to display xxx buddha's image... xxx blooming cherry tree 
xxxxxx today again, "cherry blossoms! xxx cherry blossoms!" xxx they say 
xxxxxx sleeping mat, xxx amid cherry blossoms cooling xxx my heels 
xxxxxx one raindrop xxx pats my head... xxx from the cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx night's cherry blossoms, xxx heavenly ladies xxx among us 
xxxxxx again the river xxx blooms yellow roses... xxx yoshino hill 
xxxxxx no need to latch xxx the hut's door... xxx willow in the wind 
xxxxxx the pony xxx has crept xxx through the willow 
xxxxxx the skinner's willow xxx with its lounge chair limb xxx so green! 
xxxxxx planting a willow xxx will become nights xxx of fireflies 
xxxxxx chin on hands xxx a face like goddess kannon's xxx in willow shade 
xxxxxx summer evening, xxx they watch from two houses xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx unthinkingly xxx onto the hanging bridge... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx a fresh-made dewdrop xxx is cool too... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx also in the cool breeze, xxx a gourd that can hold xxx two quarts 
xxxxxx a cool house xxx the pure land's xxx west gate 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx out of four gates xxx entering just one 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx on the earthen bridge xxx a tobacco tray 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx the little lamp can't dry xxx the starch 
xxxxxx speaking truth xxx the rainy season's crack xxx of thunder 
xxxxxx a cloudburst xxx and then, right away xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx the same sound xxx as water boiling... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx departing the facing mountain xxx it comes this way... xxx little cloudburst 
xxxxxx with apologies xxx a cloudburst passes xxx by 
xxxxxx just now xxx two cloudbursts in a row... xxx that village yonder 
xxxxxx just wind xxx yet still a cloudburst xxx evening 
xxxxxx slipping down xxx into the lake... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx flowing from the feet xxx of goddess kannon... xxx pure water 
xxxxxx even children xxx want to wear 'em! xxx pots on heads 
xxxxxx for just a little while xxx a sight to see... xxx evening's shrine boats 
xxxxxx mr. toad deigns xxx to creep out... xxx the shrine boat 
xxxxxx like this since xxx olden times? xxx evening's shrine boats 
xxxxxx mother's turn, xxx once more through xxx the purification hoop 
xxxxxx life in edo, xxx from a second-floor window xxx summer's first banner 
xxxxxx from holy jizo's xxx holy neck it hangs... xxx rice dumpling 
xxxxxx mama tosses one xxx to teach her how... xxx rice dumpling 
xxxxxx the hooked nail xxx its hanging place... xxx rice dumpling 
xxxxxx her rice dumpling xxx doesn't resemble xxx the example 
xxxxxx young folk in bathrobes xxx well, well... xxx their idea of summer garb 
xxxxxx people of kyoto xxx in parasol shade xxx drinking sake 
xxxxxx even for stealing water xxx for my rice field... xxx i take my parasol 
xxxxxx making her mother xxx hold it... xxx the parasol 
xxxxxx sleeping in new xxx mosquito nets... xxx horses of edo 
xxxxxx even the poor xxx workhorses of edo sleep... xxx in mosquito nets! 
xxxxxx dangling a mosquito net xxx i go out to eat... xxx evening's tea-and-rice 
xxxxxx forgive me please xxx rice field workers! xxx napping under the net 
xxxxxx no divine punishment yet, xxx napping xxx under the net 
xxxxxx the potted orchid xxx in the mosquito net xxx trembles 
xxxxxx under an umbrella-hat xxx curled up, asleep... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx under the bell xxx over the clapper... xxx a noon nap 
xxxxxx rice field ridge, xxx a one-rush mat xxx siesta shack 
xxxxxx one branch of the nettle tree xxx for shade... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx like the grownups xxx taking siestas... xxx a child pretends 
xxxxxx top to bottom xxx the mouse eats xxx the fan 
xxxxxx making me a fool xxx the mouse won't eat... xxx my paper fan 
xxxxxx living in comfort in edo xxx his left hand xxx fanning 
xxxxxx for the blind priest's head xxx no xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx top to bottom xxx the mouse eats it... xxx round paper fan 
xxxxxx for the stepchild xxx only one paper fan... xxx mended 
xxxxxx using up one xxx incense stick... xxx mosquito smudge pot 
xxxxxx the in-law family xxx living in harmony... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx though they bite xxx they're kyoto mosquitoes... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx night after night xxx the same faces... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx night after night xxx rejuvenation... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx shallow well, xxx the little fish's playmate xxx sweet jelly tub 
xxxxxx in a village xxx without birds xxx bats at dinnertime 
xxxxxx foolish bird, xxx after molting xxx what are you thinking? 
xxxxxx walking along xxx drying the paper umbrella... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx in this darkness xxx don't get your nose picked! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx that way xxx the stones sing too! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx rain pours down, xxx a cuckoo xxx on mount machikane 
xxxxxx cuckoo, xxx in a palanquin to yoshiwara xxx he flies! 
xxxxxx mountain cuckoo xxx you're nothing xxx but a crybaby! 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx don't catch old age! xxx my house 
xxxxxx though wrapped xxx in a butterbur leaf... xxx firefly's light 
xxxxxx evicted xxx from the sunset bell... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx stumbling into xxx mosquito smudge smoke... xxx a firefly 
xxxxxx after leaving kyoto xxx catching your breath? xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx first firefly xxx why the cold shoulder? xxx it's me! 
xxxxxx get out of sin city xxx get out! xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx being an orphan xxx i cast no light... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx toward the calling voice xxx flying with gusto... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx do you think my sleeve xxx is grass? xxx crawling firefly 
xxxxxx o insects of summer xxx there's time yet xxx for lovemaking! 
xxxxxx my hut's lamp, xxx even moths don't come xxx to the flame 
xxxxxx don't strike xxx sunset's bell... xxx tiger moth 
xxxxxx to a hut with no lamp xxx hidden in trees xxx a tiger moth flits 
xxxxxx why is playing xxx with fire such fun... xxx tiger moth? 
xxxxxx fleeing the hell xxx of thicket ants... xxx tiger moth 
xxxxxx blade of grass xxx sprouted from a wall xxx mosquito's den 
xxxxxx on a blade of grass xxx the mosquito xxx plays dead 
xxxxxx holding fast xxx to the stone buddha xxx a mosquito 
xxxxxx living long xxx the flies, fleas, mosquitoes... xxx a poor village 
xxxxxx the mother cat xxx gnawing her kitten's xxx fleas 
xxxxxx my sleeping mat, xxx where the mouse drops xxx her fleas 
xxxxxx having gnawed their fleas xxx and put them to bed, she leaves... xxx mother cat 
xxxxxx outskirts of edo, xxx tiny slices for sale xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx summer's first bonito, xxx just tiny slices xxx for sale 
xxxxxx before the admiral xxx hordes of them! xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx summer's first bonito, xxx just tiny slices xxx for sale 
xxxxxx outskirts of edo, xxx tiny slices for sale xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx a rainy night, xxx sizing up the potted xxx peony 
xxxxxx in edo xxx even the blooming pink xxx is sold 
xxxxxx duckweed xxx inside the kettle too... xxx blooming 
xxxxxx duckweed, xxx while it carouses xxx it blooms 
xxxxxx floating duckweed, xxx appropriate xxx in this floating world 
xxxxxx moss provides xxx the blooming flowers... xxx grave mound 
xxxxxx what are you counting xxx sparrows? xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx world of bamboo shoots, xxx the mountain's bamboo grasses xxx also raise children 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx a woman digs them up xxx like a dog 
xxxxxx a night sermon xxx with gestures... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx facing the god xxx of pear tree hill... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx the horse sleeps xxx standing up... xxx persimmon blooms 
xxxxxx the praying mantis's xxx shy expression... xxx wild roses 
xxxxxx my scrawny plum tree xxx too xxx is fruitless 
xxxxxx the scrawny plum tree xxx is fruitless too... xxx my life 
xxxxxx the puppy comes tumbling xxx after the red xxx plum 
xxxxxx for the red plum xxx in leafy shade... xxx barking puppy 
xxxxxx not knowing that xxx autumn's begun, puppy xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx the dogs xxx make way for me... xxx snowy road 
xxxxxx "first autumn morning" xxx just saying it... xxx feel old 
xxxxxx nippy weather, xxx the buddha takes leave xxx of zenko temple 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx on the fence the tea strainer's xxx shadow 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx for the chrysanthemum too xxx a little hot water 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx men of leisure xxx stay put 
xxxxxx the chicken xxx tilts its head in wonder... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx a boulder that looks xxx like an old woman asleep... xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx i'm all alone xxx on the ferry... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx the drunk i hired xxx in the autumn dusk 
xxxxxx mum festival, xxx the drunk hired hand xxx gives me sake 
xxxxxx hanging bridge, xxx a blind man crosses too xxx in autumn dusk 
xxxxxx crossing the bridge xxx behind the blind man... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx i too xxx without a home... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the pine tree too xxx in the circle of old men... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx sickle moon, xxx in the reed huts of edo too xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx my pine tree too xxx is bent with age... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx into my home village xxx it flows... xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx in cold water xxx sipping the stars... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx on the nape of my neck xxx a chill... xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the sickle moon... xxx cicada husk 
xxxxxx eighth month, xxx a rainy night, pre-harvest moon xxx in the mountains of shinano 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx deep in the mountain xxx a mountain moon 
xxxxxx one nondrinker, xxx harvest moon eclipse xxx gazers 
xxxxxx go ahead, steal xxx those rice cakes on the eaves! xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx even the buddha xxx ventures outside... xxx clear fall weather 
xxxxxx in two houses xxx preparing rice cakes... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the buddha of zenko temple xxx is gone 
xxxxxx from the weaned xxx pony's face... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx floating forth xxx on the morning dew xxx mountain town 
xxxxxx if they were sweet xxx dewdrops, no doubt, would be xxx "mine" and "thine" 
xxxxxx even on his arms xxx dewdrops xxx the tea seller 
xxxxxx morning dew xxx more than enough xxx for face-washing 
xxxxxx earthen teapot xxx ah! all full xxx with autumn dew 
xxxxxx dewdrops scatter, xxx over fifty travelers xxx en masse 
xxxxxx this dewdrop world's xxx dewdrops in a row... xxx little gambling shack 
xxxxxx this world xxx is a dewdrop world xxx yes... but... 
xxxxxx the field horse's head xxx is drying... xxx autumn dew 
xxxxxx dripping from the flower vendor's xxx display... xxx morning dew 
xxxxxx evening dew, xxx the lamp is lit xxx in its usual place 
xxxxxx autumn departs xxx yet still on the rice field xxx autumn dew 
xxxxxx in lightning's flash xxx faces in a row... xxx old men 
xxxxxx lightning impregnates xxx seeds with life... xxx even for weeds 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx only the puppy's face xxx is innocent 
xxxxxx harbinger xxx of a fruitful year... xxx huge lightning! 
xxxxxx plumes of plume grass xxx all a-flutter... xxx festival dancers 
xxxxxx entering kyoto xxx he lets loose a neigh... xxx shinano pony 
xxxxxx feeding him grass xxx farewell! farewell! xxx the pony's master 
xxxxxx led-away pony, xxx how has this year's xxx buckwheat grown? 
xxxxxx a parting gift xxx of wildflowers... xxx seeing off the horse 
xxxxxx a sack of buckwheat xxx goes with him... xxx seeing off the pony 
xxxxxx harvest gifts, xxx in the dog's bowl too xxx boiled beans and rice 
xxxxxx harvest gift, xxx on the tray laying xxx a good-luck bag 
xxxxxx chrysantheum festival, xxx the drunk i hired xxx gives me sake 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx with the drunk i hired xxx chrysanthemum festival wine 
xxxxxx hey, young pine xxx how about a song? xxx bird clapper 
xxxxxx night in the hut, xxx from every direction xxx a cloth-pounding cacophony 
xxxxxx it's a land xxx of treasured children! xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx watching her treasured xxx child's sleeping face... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx watching her treasured xxx child's sleeping face... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx it's a land xxx of treasured children! xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx going back to sleep xxx with praise from my heart... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx faintly heard, xxx one cloth-pounder xxx is mother 
xxxxxx sunrise, xxx ten deer at least xxx singing in pairs 
xxxxxx back window, xxx the deer strikes a pose xxx the dog barks 
xxxxxx back window, xxx the deer strikes a pose xxx the dog sleeps 
xxxxxx even the deer, xxx parents, child xxx a family of three 
xxxxxx the young buck kneels xxx on one knee... xxx mountain moon 
xxxxxx deer in the shadows xxx of plume grass... xxx how many couples? 
xxxxxx cries of the deer, xxx in a village without dogs xxx a moonlit night 
xxxxxx a deer cries xxx and the insects aren't sleeping xxx either 
xxxxxx barking deer xxx do you think i'm xxx a suspicious character? 
xxxxxx the friendly deer, xxx my hands for a pillow xxx and my feet 
xxxxxx my feet for a pillow xxx and my hands... xxx the friendly deer 
xxxxxx in the thicket xxx the old deer calls xxx for honor's sake 
xxxxxx night storm, xxx blowing in the window xxx cry of a deer 
xxxxxx glimpsing suspicious me xxx the deer sounds xxx the alarm 
xxxxxx passing through xxx the grain checking station... xxx a quail 
xxxxxx "there's the moon! xxx the moon!" xxx wild geese clamor 
xxxxxx in the wake xxx of the buddhist procession... xxx honking geese 
xxxxxx the long snake xxx head to tail, down the hole... xxx success! 
xxxxxx into the snake's hole xxx o foolish xxx mouse 
xxxxxx singing insects, too xxx make music xxx in this world 
xxxxxx o insects xxx don't you complain too! xxx this autumn 
xxxxxx for singing insects xxx complaining xxx is a feat 
xxxxxx the singing insects xxx so prone xxx to complaining! 
xxxxxx in this world xxx among insects too... xxx good singers, bad singers 
xxxxxx what a clamor! xxx even for the insects xxx night work 
xxxxxx better than me xxx at long distance! xxx farting bug 
xxxxxx on the tip xxx of buddha's nose... xxx a fart bug 
xxxxxx fallen face-up xxx but singing... xxx autumn cicada 
xxxxxx stuffing himself xxx on the morning dew xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx a gang of red xxx dragonflies... xxx mount kamiji 
xxxxxx today too xxx dragging his tail... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the distant mountain xxx reflected in his eyes... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx departing xxx from the dragonfly's top... xxx his head 
xxxxxx slipping right off xxx the dragonfly... xxx his head 
xxxxxx dragonflies like people, xxx restless, restless xxx eyes 
xxxxxx a dragonfly copies xxx the red leaves... xxx tatsuta river 
xxxxxx like the weaver's xxx chopstick for her loom... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx atop the hundred xxx foot-tall pole... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx scowling xxx at the sickle moon... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx deep inside xxx a cricket is singing... xxx oven 
xxxxxx the cricket xxx "cricky! cricky!" laughing xxx by himself 
xxxxxx locusts flying xxx "the word is good! xxx all good!" 
xxxxxx katydids, xxx when three of them gather xxx they quarrel 
xxxxxx the katydid, xxx even while they sell him xxx singing 
xxxxxx from the hole xxx in the money box... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx to the beat xxx of grinding teeth xxx the katydid sings 
xxxxxx atop the scripture xxx reader's head... xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx at the sound of the sunset xxx bell... xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx one by one the wildflowers xxx scatter 
xxxxxx the verandah cat's xxx lofty expression... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx how you've grown! xxx last year's champion xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx last year xxx "champion of champions"... xxx chrysanthemum's placard 
xxxxxx ashamed that the winning xxx spirit's been lost... xxx chrysanthemum hut 
xxxxxx in kyoto xxx even for chrysanthmums... xxx cotton courtier caps 
xxxxxx the mountain chrysanthemum xxx born to its nature... xxx perfectly straight 
xxxxxx if it weren't for people xxx they'd not grow crooked... xxx mums 
xxxxxx the mountain chrysanthemum xxx grows up straight... xxx naturally 
xxxxxx mountain chrysanthemum, xxx growing crooked's a thing xxx it knows nothing about 
xxxxxx covering about ten xxx with cotton cloth... xxx young chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx in a village of people xxx they grow crooked... xxx field chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx bush clover temple, xxx the deer strikes a pose xxx the dog sleeps 
xxxxxx my bush clover, xxx instead of deer xxx a sleeping dog 
xxxxxx how many people xxx sweated and toiled! xxx rice blossoms 
xxxxxx rice blossoms, xxx a large man xxx lost in them 
xxxxxx even the puppy xxx drums his belly... xxx rice blossoms 
xxxxxx in little ditch xxx by the vacant temple... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx about ten strands xxx loaded on the dog... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx a man must be a samurai! xxx though little xxx you're a hot pepper 
xxxxxx the children xxx pretend to be foxes... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx the children xxx pretend to be foxes... xxx this also is done in plume grass 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx come close and the plume grass xxx cuts you 
xxxxxx amid plumes of plume grass xxx a poor "praise buddha!" xxx hidden 
xxxxxx where people xxx see ghosts... xxx field of plume grass 
xxxxxx enduring the astringent xxx persimmon... xxx kyoto child 
xxxxxx mother eats xxx the astringent part... xxx mountain persimmon 
xxxxxx the persimmon's astringent, xxx the crow, too, knows xxx and passes on 
xxxxxx kyoto child, xxx pretending the persimmon xxx is sweet 
xxxxxx homecoming servant, xxx pretending the persimmon xxx is sweet 
xxxxxx mountain persimmons, xxx in buddha's eyes xxx they are sweet 
xxxxxx this pomegranate xxx tastes like me xxx enjoy it, little louse! 
xxxxxx ashamed, xxx eyes glued to the chestnut xxx beyond reach 
xxxxxx big mushroom, xxx even horse dung xxx had its day 
xxxxxx it's a man-killing xxx mushroom, true... xxx but pretty! 
xxxxxx behind me xxx the cold sneaks in... xxx hole in the wall 
xxxxxx getting used to xxx horsemen crossing it... xxx the ice 
xxxxxx if you cross it xxx cross lightly! xxx ice 
xxxxxx a cold moon xxx facing the cold xxx mountain temple 
xxxxxx the fire reaches xxx the distant mountain... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx a wiggling worm xxx peeks out...winter rain! xxx winter rain! 
xxxxxx just for me xxx a storm, winter wind xxx and slippery road 
xxxxxx it's a load xxx on the cow's head... xxx pile of snow 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx the snow falls xxx stubbornly 
xxxxxx what a straight xxx piss hole! xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx in falling snow xxx delivered to a palanquin... xxx buckwheat noodles 
xxxxxx the horse stops xxx at the sake shop... xxx a blizzard 
xxxxxx a triangle of snow xxx blown on the floor... xxx to my pillow 
xxxxxx from the window's hole xxx and the wall's crack... xxx the blizzard 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx the cat comes with a coat xxx of snowflakes 
xxxxxx morning frost, xxx yet still a child sells xxx temple flowers 
xxxxxx cricket on a frosty xxx night... xxx bragging! 
xxxxxx beggar child, xxx even in his lap xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx five or six horses xxx cooling down... xxx the withered fields 
xxxxxx the dirt-poor god xxx of my house, too xxx joins the throng 
xxxxxx tenth month's xxx venerable twelfth day... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx a haiku reading xxx in memoriam... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx even in hokkaido this moon xxx in the pine 
xxxxxx lotus sutra, xxx the birds remember basho xxx too 
xxxxxx in the outcastes' town xxx a buddhist banner... xxx the frosty month 
xxxxxx mokubo temple, xxx praising buddha, too xxx for winter voice drills 
xxxxxx kindly the wind xxx sweeps my sooty xxx hut 
xxxxxx his soot-broom's pile xxx looks like takasago... xxx old man dances 
xxxxxx even soot-sweeping xxx on an unlucky day... xxx so much harder! 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx four or five years of soot xxx needs sweeping 
xxxxxx hot bath steam xxx rising from his head... xxx twelfth month singer 
xxxxxx even well into xxx the first month... xxx twelfth month singers! 
xxxxxx not to be outdone xxx by the twelfth month singers... xxx the gate's sparrows 
xxxxxx a samisen joins xxx the twelfth month singers... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers, xxx one strokes plum blossoms xxx with his whisk 
xxxxxx after a hacking cold xxx right away... xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx three cats guard xxx the rice cakes 
xxxxxx the god's rice cakes xxx weighed in the scales... xxx floating world 
xxxxxx down the middle xxx of the flat rice cake... xxx cat's path 
xxxxxx great japan! xxx even for the stable's horses xxx a gift of new clothes 
xxxxxx even the crow xxx has a grove xxx to grow old in 
xxxxxx not aiming to grow xxx a year older... xxx traveling crow 
xxxxxx practicing xxx with the snowshoes... xxx putting them on 
xxxxxx snowshoes, xxx in front of the hut xxx print after print 
xxxxxx snowshoes, xxx following behind, the dog xxx swims 
xxxxxx the village child xxx builds it with a spoon... xxx snow mountain 
xxxxxx the village child xxx builds it with her hands... xxx snow mountain 
xxxxxx my dwelling, xxx somewhere behind xxx the bundled snow 
xxxxxx even our fleeting snow xxx becomes xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx watching a war lord xxx drenched... xxx my cozy brazier 
xxxxxx charcoal fire, xxx passing through old age xxx is like that 
xxxxxx familiar grasses xxx and unfamiliar... xxx the same withering 
xxxxxx grasses that stay hidden xxx grasses that don't... xxx the same withering 
xxxxxx cultivated chrysanthemums xxx wither xxx first 
xxxxxx there's no shame xxx that you totter... xxx old chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx my gate, xxx just six radishes xxx remain in supply 
xxxxxx on the fresh-plowed xxx field fallen leaves xxx scatter 
xxxxxx the kitten dances xxx round and round... xxx falling leaves 
xxxxxx the kitten holds it down xxx just a moment... xxx fallen leaf 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx at the farmhouse the rain xxx falls sideways 
xxxxxx cranes land xxx on the rubbish heap... xxx waka beach 
xxxxxx the cranes swarm xxx the rubbish heap... xxx waka beach 
xxxxxx to a massive rock xxx grow quickly my pebble... xxx ishitaro 
xxxxxx on new year's day, too xxx standing "as is"... xxx trashy house 
xxxxxx new year's day xxx nothing to report... xxx trashy house 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx everywhere, a corrupt world's xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx a new spring starting, xxx early, so early xxx turns sour 
xxxxxx from this year on xxx in my left hand, umbrella-hat xxx in the right, knapsack 
xxxxxx from this year on xxx clear profit, carousing xxx in this world 
xxxxxx from this year on xxx just carousing... xxx this world's blossoms 
xxxxxx the first month celebration xxx starts up again... xxx waterfowl 
xxxxxx first month, second day xxx the laziness xxx begins 
xxxxxx spring's first dawn, xxx there's not a village xxx where it isn't 
xxxxxx roof after roof xxx windows open all at once... xxx first of spring 
xxxxxx don't shrivel! xxx even for the devil's tongue xxx a prosperous spring 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx wildly it grows... xxx spring pine 
xxxxxx we start the spring xxx in our everyday clothes... xxx me and the sparrow 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx on the hut's unlucky side xxx a grave 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx the obligatory xxx sparrows at the gate 
xxxxxx it's sooty too, xxx the new year god's xxx home 
xxxxxx entrusting all xxx to the new year's god... xxx head to toe 
xxxxxx the cat considers xxx jumping up... xxx new year's offering shelf 
xxxxxx for drinking buddies xxx the usual new year's pilgrimage... xxx sake shop 
xxxxxx even on honen's death-day, xxx shaky feet xxx shaky hands 
xxxxxx on the fast day xxx even the foot mill xxx is idle 
xxxxxx yanking up a little pine xxx he says xxx a prayer 
xxxxxx even for the man xxx pooping in the field... xxx new year's pine 
xxxxxx sending a "happy xxx new year!" xxx down the fox's hole 
xxxxxx my new year's greeting xxx is answered... xxx second floor 
xxxxxx a good man, xxx crossing a mountain to say xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx new year's gate greetings, xxx on each side of the road xxx tracks of sandals 
xxxxxx "happy new year!" xxx at the gate, tossing the cat xxx a present 
xxxxxx reading it to discover xxx the price of rice... xxx new year's greeting letter 
xxxxxx a samurai, xxx after an apology xxx a "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx going out to collect xxx my presents... xxx making my new year's rounds 
xxxxxx making their new year's rounds xxx tracks of clogs xxx tracks of sandals 
xxxxxx meeting enroute xxx a quick exchange... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx samurai street, xxx over the quince hedge xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx the priest's shaved head xxx perks up... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx down one more xxx fox's hole... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx the best new year's xxx present! xxx her pink cheeks 
xxxxxx people of edo xxx even for the hut's dog xxx a new year's gift 
xxxxxx no one to give xxx new year's presents to... xxx little hut 
xxxxxx taking two helpings xxx of new year's gifts... xxx little boy 
xxxxxx now show us xxx your new year's gifts... xxx pink cheeks 
xxxxxx on top xxx of the new year's gifts... xxx cat curled asleep 
xxxxxx new year's gift, xxx tossed in the window xxx while i was out 
xxxxxx the treasured child xxx writes with a cane... xxx year's first calligraphy 
xxxxxx you've wrecked xxx my year's first dream! xxx cawing crow 
xxxxxx the little pilgrim xxx while receiving alms xxx flies a kite 
xxxxxx the pilgrim xxx while receiving alms xxx kite flying 
xxxxxx in place xxx of begging actors xxx chattering sparrows 
xxxxxx sitting room, xxx eyes locked on his treat xxx the monkey dances 
xxxxxx mother monkey xxx teaches her baby... xxx dance moves 
xxxxxx dancing monkey, xxx he gives his rice cake xxx to the child 
xxxxxx even for the holy hermit xxx today, a square xxx of zoni! 
xxxxxx if only you'd open your eyes xxx one more time... xxx zoni on the dinner tray 
xxxxxx in my hut xxx today, a square xxx of zoni! 
xxxxxx rice cake offerings, xxx on buddha's lap xxx for just a little while 
xxxxxx old man in the kitchen, xxx his new year's tooth-hardening xxx beats mine 
xxxxxx a new year's toast xxx for his wrinkled face... xxx laughter 
xxxxxx though she pounds the seven herbs xxx without singing... xxx a wise old face 
xxxxxx a big field xxx with a "keep out" sign... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx almost mist xxx the smoke of their pipes... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx letting the little boy xxx hold the lantern... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the chicken is treated xxx to one... xxx new year's herbs 
xxxxxx for each one picked xxx a puff on the pipe... xxx herbs 
xxxxxx the woods are dark xxx but out and about... xxx the year's first crow 
xxxxxx from this bird xxx the year's first song xxx rises 
xxxxxx it's springtime! xxx golden flowers xxx mountain moon 
xxxxxx it's springtime! xxx even the thicket's lice xxx move into the field 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx even getting in the bath xxx is a chore 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx the dog and the crow xxx quarreling 
xxxxxx the puppy has caught xxx a mouse... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a thicket mouse xxx caught by the dog 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx in coat and trousers xxx a dandified beggar 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx in coat and trousers xxx an edo beggar 
xxxxxx even for the horse xxx a dose of burning wormwood... xxx spring breeze 
xxxxxx day mist, xxx the census taker reckons it xxx about seven miles 
xxxxxx lamplight xxx in the spring mist... xxx dawn 
xxxxxx me and buddha, xxx our heads xxx in the mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx his laughing face xxx lingers 
xxxxxx atop the main temple xxx a rooster crows xxx "snow's melting!" 
xxxxxx a bird at my feet xxx takes off... xxx spring mountain 
xxxxxx into the scattering blooms xxx pilgrims xxx and buddha 
xxxxxx the founder's image on display xxx along with... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx gnawing the edge xxx of the prize painting... xxx burning wormwood 
xxxxxx the same hoe xxx plows the snow too... xxx mountain rice field 
xxxxxx friend of the pine xxx friend of the crane... xxx he plows his field 
xxxxxx tilling the morning-glory xxx field... xxx morning tea 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx filled with remorse xxx at my door 
xxxxxx the stray cat's xxx yowl for love xxx a bit weak 
xxxxxx the stray cat's wife xxx fails xxx to make her entrance 
xxxxxx she keeps the nest xxx nice and neat... xxx widow bird 
xxxxxx the black kite's nest, too xxx in the unlucky direction... xxx mount hie 
xxxxxx nightingale stomping xxx knocks it down... xxx the house's moss 
xxxxxx house's ridge-pole, xxx the crow flings down xxx moss blossoms 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx like he's been around... xxx ueno 
xxxxxx the nightingale, too xxx a bit hoarse from a cold... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx resigned to his fate... xxx voice in a cage 
xxxxxx arriving in japan xxx wearing rouge... xxx the swallows 
xxxxxx wearing rouge xxx lined up in a row... xxx morning swallows 
xxxxxx looking like ants xxx person after person... xxx an evening lark 
xxxxxx mocking the barrier xxx guard's voice... xxx pheasant 
xxxxxx don't cry, geese xxx parting is always xxx the same thing 
xxxxxx in yellow roses xxx making rude remarks... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx with a plum blossom xxx umbrella-hat, croaking xxx frog 
xxxxxx his face all ready xxx for negotiation... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx he prepares to state xxx his case... xxx squatting frog 
xxxxxx he prepares to state xxx his case... xxx squatting frog 
xxxxxx when butterflies xxx are pale blue, pale blue xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx from birth on xxx for butterflies, playing xxx is their job 
xxxxxx well behaved, xxx the butterfly, too xxx wears light blue 
xxxxxx the crazy one xxx calms down a bit... xxx light blue butterfly 
xxxxxx playing their games xxx on the sly... xxx pale blue butterflies 
xxxxxx counting heads xxx of the shrine visitors... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx butterfly dancing, xxx under the horse's gut xxx unaware 
xxxxxx butterfly, look! xxx parents and child, three xxx sleep together 
xxxxxx i crawl in to join xxx the sleepers... xxx meadow butterflies 
xxxxxx sleeping in a row, xxx little butterfly, cat xxx high priest 
xxxxxx gambling in the field, xxx from the pot xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx taking a dip xxx in the creek's bath water... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx in the hot tub xxx on someone's head... xxx butterfly's rest stop 
xxxxxx with a light heart xxx in this world... xxx light blue butterfly 
xxxxxx on a blade of grass xxx the horsefly xxx plays dead 
xxxxxx the parent bee xxx its honey being stolen xxx buzzes near 
xxxxxx the bees with children xxx are work-a-holics... xxx making honey 
xxxxxx renting a spot xxx next to the beehive... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx the little boy xxx tumbling all day... xxx violets 
xxxxxx with a yogi's self-denial xxx they've bloomed... xxx camellias at my gate 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx with a yogi's self-denial... xxx blooming camellias 
xxxxxx with a yogi's self-denial xxx it's bloomed... xxx my gate's plum tree 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx with a yogi's self-denial... xxx blooming camellias 
xxxxxx with a yogi's self-denial xxx they've bloomed... xxx camellias at my gate 
xxxxxx young sparrows xxx playing ring-around-the- xxx camellia 
xxxxxx with one blooming xxx plum tree xxx teahouse of reeds 
xxxxxx supported by a blooming xxx plum tree xxx the roadside tea-stand 
xxxxxx plum blooming, xxx deep in shinano, too xxx tracks of sandals 
xxxxxx still plum blossoms xxx my head, by itself xxx bows 
xxxxxx by itself xxx my head bows... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx on one sleeve xxx the bright moon... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx even the black lacquered xxx horse flashes bright! xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even here xxx a holy image enshrined xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even for the god xxx of the outhouse... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx stuck-up plum trees xxx blossoming white... xxx fujiha temple 
xxxxxx the head priest xxx pretends to be a drinker... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx about a hundred birds xxx passing through... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx go away, divine wind xxx to the northern sea! xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx when the wind xxx is finally done, so are xxx the blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx a sleeve-tugging rain xxx again today 
xxxxxx with a samisen xxx she supports her parents... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx takai field, xxx just one blossom cloud xxx on a trunk 
xxxxxx while selling his dumplings xxx and such... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx shading his eyes xxx where are you gazing, weasel? xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx around the old man's waist xxx blossom viewing... xxx a name tag 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx cows follow cows xxx horses, horses 
xxxxxx blossom-viewers xxx flock according to xxx their feathers 
xxxxxx cherry blossom cold spell, xxx even the dog xxx can't help but sneeze 
xxxxxx blossoming mountain xxx from east, west, north, south xxx they come 
xxxxxx blizzard of blossoms, xxx with muddy sandals xxx passing through 
xxxxxx buddha's saints xxx come out! come out! xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx though not quite xxx one foot tall... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx horses follow horses xxx on their way... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx cows follow cows xxx horses, horses 
xxxxxx stealthily xxx those have turned pale blue... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx over there's xxx the dog's toilet... xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx sticking to xxx the bean curd soup... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx without regret xxx they fall and scatter... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx when cherry blossoms xxx scatter... xxx no regrets 
xxxxxx in yellow roses xxx shading his eyes to gaze... xxx a weasel 
xxxxxx shading his eyes xxx where are you gazing, weasel? xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx yellow roses, xxx used to the hot spring's steam xxx they bloom 
xxxxxx in the short night xxx crossing bridges en masse... xxx kyoto pilgrimage 
xxxxxx summer heat, xxx today, all day xxx the playful clouds 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx through the window xxx pure land paradise! 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx one tatami mat spreads xxx in my house 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx ladling coins xxx with a spoon 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx my umbrella-hat left xxx at the last inn 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx behind me too... xxx a blind woman from echigo 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx feeling like silver xxx or goldfish 
xxxxxx in fifth month rain xxx no incense xxx no farts 
xxxxxx fifth month rain, xxx time for tobacco xxx and tinderbox 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx into the hot tub i go... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx what a face xxx this frog is making! xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx sharing my parched beans xxx with a pigeon... xxx fifth month rain 
xxxxxx just now xxx how many cloudbursts? xxx the mountain in back 
xxxxxx even the weeds xxx get a cloudburst xxx just for them 
xxxxxx showing off xxx with a cloudburst... xxx god of the mountain 
xxxxxx even the cloudbursts xxx hate it... xxx rice field by my gate 
xxxxxx at the tail end xxx of the cloudburst crowing... xxx rooftop rooster 
xxxxxx the cloudburst xxx retraces its steps... xxx favoring the village 
xxxxxx the cloudburst showing xxx favoritism... xxx mountain by the village 
xxxxxx standing dead center xxx in the downpour... xxx a blind man 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx on a red sleeping mat xxx a red flower 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx outside the hairdresser's xxx a potted pine 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx on this lawn, that lawn xxx just a cup's worth 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx atop the sleeping mat xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx washing my laundry xxx with my clothes on... xxx summer rain 
xxxxxx rainclouds, xxx just to kill time xxx billowing 
xxxxxx though small xxx they line up too... xxx peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx mountain country, xxx and above, too xxx peaks of clouds 
xxxxxx after today xxx it's your turn to dry up... xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx praising buddha too xxx with her samisen... xxx festival 
xxxxxx shining in the dawn xxx a rich vip... xxx buddha amid birthday flowers 
xxxxxx horseflies' and bees' xxx big lucky day... xxx buddha's birthday flowers 
xxxxxx the ants rush xxx to make a road... xxx buddha's birthday flowers 
xxxxxx even a frog xxx is offered a sip... xxx buddha's birthday tea 
xxxxxx wanting to give xxx birthday buddha a lick... xxx little child 
xxxxxx on the tip xxx of birthday buddha's finger xxx setting moon 
xxxxxx for pure white flowers xxx fourth month, eighth day xxx has arrived! 
xxxxxx for pure white flowers xxx it's the fourth month... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx a spider descends xxx in vain... xxx buddha's birthday flowers 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx the butterfly sips xxx buddha's tea water 
xxxxxx like wise men do xxx i go into seclusion... xxx heart of summer 
xxxxxx age of the gods! xxx atop mount fuji too xxx an inn 
xxxxxx "come this way!" xxx the horsefly guides xxx mount fuji's pilgrims 
xxxxxx in one morning xxx i climb around ten... xxx mount fujis 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx i can straddle it xxx this mount fuji! 
xxxxxx the frogs become xxx talkative... xxx evening's shrine boats 
xxxxxx with the child xxx the cat, too, goes slow... xxx shrine boats 
xxxxxx floating to play xxx with a bamboo grass boat... xxx shinto shrine 
xxxxxx an insect too xxx quickly shakes a bell... xxx purification ritual 
xxxxxx with grave seriousness xxx frogs line up too... xxx evening's purification 
xxxxxx the wind rustles xxx truthfulness... xxx river shrine boats 
xxxxxx rousting his skinny fleas xxx the cat too... xxx evening's purification 
xxxxxx rubbing even xxx the hairless head... xxx purification hoop 
xxxxxx purification hoop, xxx we'd go through hand-in-hand xxx if i had a child 
xxxxxx two butterflies xxx pass through together... xxx purification hoop 
xxxxxx with a shrug xxx the little plague god xxx floats away 
xxxxxx the little plague god xxx flies in the gust... xxx its body so light! 
xxxxxx little plague god, xxx setting sail on a boat xxx of bamboo grass 
xxxxxx bundled xxx with wildflowers too... xxx rice dumplings 
xxxxxx dangling from xxx the little boy's neck... xxx a rice dumpling 
xxxxxx the kitten unwraps it xxx with clever paws... xxx rice dumpling 
xxxxxx festival, xxx cormorants asleep in a row xxx on holiday 
xxxxxx even the cormorants xxx on holiday today... xxx festival 
xxxxxx baby comorant cries, xxx his mother, calling back xxx returns to the gate 
xxxxxx today, xxx even in thick smoke xxx cormorants make their living 
xxxxxx looking back, back xxx to her crying children xxx cormorant departs 
xxxxxx after praying for rain xxx the result... xxx a flood! 
xxxxxx today too xxx today too... xxx cheating clouds 
xxxxxx i let the buck xxx carry my notebook... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx skillful hands xxx skillful mouths... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx vain mankind! xxx so soon sick of their xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx about three people xxx per block... xxx summer robes 
xxxxxx in no time xxx filled with sleep wrinkles... xxx my summer kimono 
xxxxxx in celebratory light blue xxx kimonos... xxx morning pilgrimage 
xxxxxx with his chin propped xxx on his abacus... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx a naughty child xxx joins the adults... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx they huff and puff xxx up the hill... xxx paper fans flitting 
xxxxxx treasured child, xxx one more mighty effort xxx with the samurai's fan 
xxxxxx fanning his back sores xxx from burning wormwood... xxx edo paper fan 
xxxxxx stepping over xxx the smudge pot to enter... xxx my hut 
xxxxxx emerging from xxx the smudge pot smoke... xxx tea cakes 
xxxxxx straw mat marks xxx on my butt... xxx a cool breeze 
xxxxxx giving up xxx waiting for cool air... xxx the little boy sleeps 
xxxxxx the mountain i saw from edo xxx is now here... xxx a cool breeze 
xxxxxx the blacksmith basks xxx in the cool air... xxx night work 
xxxxxx others toil in the evening xxx not the hermit... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx my treasured companion xxx for the cool air... xxx now, dew on the grass 
xxxxxx skillful hands xxx skillful mouths... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx mountain shade, xxx while enjoying the cool air xxx straw sandals, teahouse 
xxxxxx talking about this mountain xxx and that... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx ryogoku bridge, xxx even in this moment of cool air xxx a lost child sign 
xxxxxx one horsefly xxx on the horse's belly xxx cooling off 
xxxxxx touched by xxx the hot spring's steam... xxx planting rice 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx atop the mountain, too xxx rice planters' umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even atop a mountain xxx rice planters singing 
xxxxxx being hugged xxx by a worldly fellow... xxx fawn 
xxxxxx sharing xxx his mother's pillow... xxx wounded deer 
xxxxxx by all means xxx stay inside the fence! xxx molting bird 
xxxxxx the baby bird's eyes xxx riveted on mother... xxx molting 
xxxxxx the morning moon xxx is straight overhead... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx just now xxx back from its edo tour... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx in heavy rain xxx seething with resentment xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx why does the monkey xxx plug his ears xxx cuckoo? 
xxxxxx the servant has xxx a snake-eye parasol... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx breezing past xxx the paper lantern... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx a stupid quarrel! xxx the cuckoo hurries xxx away 
xxxxxx morning's first voice xxx "to edo! to edo!" xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx once again xxx sending us humans to bed... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx looking askance xxx at the great lord's fortress... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx that voice of yours xxx too shrill! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't get your nose picked xxx by the mountain hermit! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx trying to beat xxx mount asama's pilgrims... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx on a mountain xxx of golden flowers in bloom xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx even you, mountain cuckoo xxx visit me! xxx back window 
xxxxxx a mountain cuckoo singing, xxx if i could only xxx sleep! 
xxxxxx "in these wilds xxx there's a hot spring!" xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx my home village xxx beneath that cloud... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx on the mountain temple's xxx coal grinder too... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx nightingale xxx you're growing old... xxx but what a voice! 
xxxxxx though growing old xxx the nightingale's xxx a nightingale! 
xxxxxx reed thrush xxx were you born xxx mouth first? 
xxxxxx "you're a lot of fools xxx wearing skullcaps!" xxx evening moorhen 
xxxxxx with skin peeled off xxx snake xxx are you cool now? 
xxxxxx sweeping them off xxx the horse's back... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx a firefly xxx resort 
xxxxxx first firefly xxx how many nights did you sleep xxx in buddha's flowers? 
xxxxxx from my pillow xxx to the soles of my feet xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx mosquito larvae xxx dance in memoriam... xxx the tomb's puddle 
xxxxxx mosquito swarms, xxx from the dog's butt xxx and head 
xxxxxx men of leisure, xxx "mosquitoes have come!" xxx they say 
xxxxxx chasing the fly swarm xxx with his mouth... xxx dog at the gate 
xxxxxx even the old cow xxx has a fly-whisking xxx tail 
xxxxxx the old hand xxx swats a fly xxx already gone 
xxxxxx gaping mouthed xxx and fly-hungry... xxx dog at the gate 
xxxxxx my clean-shaven head, xxx the flies xxx stomp on it 
xxxxxx temple fly mimic, xxx hands xxx praying beads 
xxxxxx after the fly swarm xxx escapes, swat! xxx my wrinkled hand 
xxxxxx don't swat the fly! xxx rubbing hands xxx rubbing feet 
xxxxxx trudging along xxx enduring his fleas... xxx country cat 
xxxxxx in the lake xxx heading for the mountain... xxx the flea swims 
xxxxxx little snail xxx inch by inch, climb xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx in a sake cup xxx a flea xxx swimming! swimming! 
xxxxxx my home, xxx next door to a thicket xxx of fleas 
xxxxxx are you watching xxx the puppy's dream? xxx cicada singing at night 
xxxxxx chirring as he climbs xxx cicada on the lacquered xxx post 
xxxxxx so many cicadas xxx so many raindrops from the eaves! xxx great temple hall 
xxxxxx temple in the thicket, xxx even at night, now and then xxx cicada song 
xxxxxx some sing all night xxx some eat knotweed... xxx a matter of taste 
xxxxxx some eat knotweed xxx some fly into flames... xxx a matter of taste 
xxxxxx verandah flower, xxx making a skillful turn xxx a snail 
xxxxxx the snail does just xxx as he pleases... xxx curled asleep 
xxxxxx having a siesta xxx on gensei's fence... xxx a snail 
xxxxxx little snail, no different xxx asleep xxx awake 
xxxxxx straw fence, xxx coming down skillfully xxx a snail 
xxxxxx coming out xxx to a hot world, earthworm's xxx prosperity 
xxxxxx in my ramshackle hut xxx she holds her head high... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx in the pitiful garden xxx no pitiful xxx peonies! 
xxxxxx why did the blooming xxx pink break? xxx oh why? 
xxxxxx in something's shadow xxx slyly blooming... xxx little pink 
xxxxxx on the duckweed's softness xxx the frog's xxx picnic 
xxxxxx duckweed, xxx even blooming in a bucket xxx wind-rustled 
xxxxxx sir mouse xxx nimbly, nimbly crosses xxx the duckweed 
xxxxxx barley husking, xxx in the middle of the highway xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx in holy jizo's xxx lap, eyes, nose... xxx blooming moss 
xxxxxx undented xxx by the cat's nap... xxx moss blossoms 
xxxxxx even the roof's moss xxx blooms xxx then scatters 
xxxxxx house's ridge-pole, xxx the crow flings down xxx moss blossoms 
xxxxxx evening shadows, xxx even the poorly growing xxx moss has bloomed 
xxxxxx the old priest xxx picks off the dust... xxx moss blossoms 
xxxxxx blocking the light xxx of the back window... xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx the young bamboo's xxx peak of youth, too xxx soon passes 
xxxxxx scratching the face xxx of a bamboo shoot... xxx cat's shadow 
xxxxxx kindly guarding xxx the bamboo shoots... xxx holy jizo 
xxxxxx upside-down buckets xxx stand in a row... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx charcoal cinders xxx dry on the eaves... xxx fresh new leaves 
xxxxxx a man of leisure xxx lazily sprawls... xxx shadow of new leaves 
xxxxxx cat on the fence xxx bucket on the eaves... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx fresh new leaves, xxx the cat and the crow xxx quarrel 
xxxxxx the fresh new leaves xxx happy and well... xxx muen temple 
xxxxxx the fresh new leaves xxx happy and well... xxx temple for the departed without relatives 
xxxxxx the holy man xxx grabs a siesta... xxx grove of summer trees 
xxxxxx rain shower, xxx the grave's shikimi branches, too xxx are summer trees 
xxxxxx making straw sandals xxx while selling them... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx the deutzia blossoms xxx light up xxx my lap 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms xxx on all four corners... xxx farmhouse at dusk 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms xxx on all four corners... xxx headman's house at dusk 
xxxxxx deutzia in bloom xxx the children make xxx mud-dumplings 
xxxxxx sprinkled into xxx great edo... xxx red plums 
xxxxxx handled and squeezed xxx edo's plums xxx turn red 
xxxxxx the little tub's fish xxx announce... xxx "it's autumn's first morning!" 
xxxxxx moon at the gate, xxx as the heat dwindles xxx so do companions 
xxxxxx in morning's cold xxx wiping even the head xxx of the stone 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx a wipe of the cleaning rag xxx for the gate's stone 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx a wipe of the cleaning rag xxx for the gate's stone 
xxxxxx in morning's cold xxx wiping even the head xxx of the stone 
xxxxxx morning cold, xxx bloated with tea, visiting xxx schichidai temple 
xxxxxx even holy jizo xxx bewitches people... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx a sound to split trees even xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx autumn evening, xxx even for beggar-town xxx festival guests 
xxxxxx haul some night water xxx to my rice field... xxx milky way! 
xxxxxx the half-asleep crow xxx raises a ruckus... xxx milky way 
xxxxxx fukagawa, xxx an oyster shell mountain xxx and autumn's moon 
xxxxxx remote village, xxx the bon festival moon xxx postponed 
xxxxxx the paper door xxx gets a scrubbing... xxx bon festival moon 
xxxxxx roasting millet xxx till it's charred... xxx bon festival moon 
xxxxxx "tomorrow night xxx the harvest moon!" xxx old man's promise 
xxxxxx not swatting horseflies xxx not swatting bees... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx this here mountain xxx will have to do... xxx tonight's moon 
xxxxxx after a second piss xxx right away... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx taking a seat xxx on the pine's branch... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx on the pine tree's xxx tippy-top... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx plum and cherry tree xxx blossoms return! 
xxxxxx harvest moon-gazing xxx priests, samurai xxx merchants 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx priests, samurai xxx merchants 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx digging in the teacup xxx for sake money 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx the peddler selling xxx eight-penny sake 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx some are stretched out xxx some praying 
xxxxxx firewood piles xxx one... two... xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx the morning-glories bloom xxx a second time! xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx tongue-tied xxx the crow flies along... xxx autumn rain 
xxxxxx in autumn wind xxx staggering breathlessly... xxx mountain pass 
xxxxxx a sumo wrestler xxx makes it blow... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx onlookers xxx at a funeral... xxx the autumn wind 
xxxxxx dawn's glow xxx hasn't quite yet dyed xxx the dewdrops 
xxxxxx potato leaf, xxx i make a pearl xxx of dew 
xxxxxx even for silver dewdrops xxx gibberish xxx rolling down 
xxxxxx with the silver dew xxx flowing along xxx mountain town 
xxxxxx floating forth xxx on the morning dew xxx mountain town 
xxxxxx from leaf to leaf xxx tumbling down... xxx autumn dew 
xxxxxx the human goblins xxx bow their heads... xxx dew dripping down 
xxxxxx each round ball xxx two quarts... xxx lotus blossom dewdrops 
xxxxxx how much water xxx in each round ball? xxx lotus blossom dewdrops 
xxxxxx each round ball xxx two quarts... xxx lotus blossom dewdrops 
xxxxxx in vain grass xxx dewdrops forming xxx in vain 
xxxxxx the rain shower left xxx imitation pearls... xxx dewdrops 
xxxxxx the mountain town xxx with dewdrops everywhere xxx flowing 
xxxxxx you look too xxx robber! dewdrops xxx in the grass 
xxxxxx tomorrow, tomorrow xxx and tomorrow's weather... xxx mount asama mist 
xxxxxx bon lantern viewing xxx from morning on a ruckus... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx dance, my little xxx dervishes! xxx sparrows at the gate 
xxxxxx if ishitaro xxx were still in this world... xxx bon festival dance 
xxxxxx after the dance xxx right away, cutting xxx the morning grass 
xxxxxx after the dance xxx right away, grass-cutting xxx clamor 
xxxxxx so young xxx so very young! xxx husband and wife stars 
xxxxxx land of gods, xxx even among heaven's stars xxx husband and wife 
xxxxxx smiles beaming xxx on their young faces... xxx husband and wife stars 
xxxxxx beaten down xxx by mount suwa's wind? xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx even with broken xxx plume-grass chopsticks... xxx festival meal 
xxxxxx beards of plume grass, too xxx rustle, rustle xxx divinely 
xxxxxx at misayama xxx even a horse celebrates... xxx plume grass 
xxxxxx misayama, xxx today, all day xxx blooming plume grass 
xxxxxx misayama, xxx even for a farmhouse xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx misayama, xxx regaling a hunter's hut xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx misayama, xxx their sight alone cools the air... xxx plume grass chopsticks 
xxxxxx harvest gift, xxx a bottle stuffed xxx with wildflowers 
xxxxxx harvest gift, xxx on the scale a beard xxx of millet 
xxxxxx better than xxx amateur fireworks... xxx cogon grass 
xxxxxx river boat, xxx on a night of fireworks xxx still selling fireworks 
xxxxxx an arm for a pillow xxx fireworks boom! xxx ka-boom! 
xxxxxx boom! boom! ka-boom! xxx so many duds... xxx fireworks 
xxxxxx in morning cold xxx a temple festival... xxx priests' sumo match 
xxxxxx even for the beggar, xxx a favorite xxx wrestler 
xxxxxx moonlight, xxx even the sumo amateur xxx has fans 
xxxxxx his wife watched xxx the match... xxx defeated wrestler 
xxxxxx in a woodblock print xxx for sale... xxx defeated wrestler 
xxxxxx he ties his horse xxx to the pine... xxx a sumo match 
xxxxxx burning rubbish, xxx a scarecrow too xxx goes up in smoke 
xxxxxx wind-bent in moonlight xxx the scarecrow leans xxx on a cane 
xxxxxx since last year xxx still standing... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx since last year xxx the last one standing... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx across the land xxx calm and happy-go-lucky... xxx scarecrows 
xxxxxx children perform xxx the "opening of eyes"... xxx for the scarecrow 
xxxxxx the village dog xxx suddenly disapproves... xxx the scarecrow 
xxxxxx packing away the scarecrow xxx grandpa pays xxx his respects 
xxxxxx in a fine spot xxx for moon gazing... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx looking younger than me xxx the scarecrow casts xxx his shadow 
xxxxxx rice paddy drains, xxx goodbye! goodbye! xxx back to the well 
xxxxxx on the hearth xxx tea cakes in a row... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx kyoto people xxx even beat their straw! xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx a clear blue sky xxx at high noon... xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx at one house xxx and at the neighbor's... xxx evening cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx tea cakes jumping xxx on the hanging shelf... xxx cloth-pounding 
xxxxxx while chanting xxx praise to buddha! xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx my house, xxx in front and in back xxx a cloth-pounding cacophony 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx you think i'm a suspicious xxx character! 
xxxxxx giving up xxx the childless deer xxx calls no more for love 
xxxxxx the childless deer, too xxx can't sleep... xxx cries in the night 
xxxxxx a wind of love xxx even for the great mountain's xxx deer! 
xxxxxx what delicateness! xxx even for deep-mountain deer xxx lust 
xxxxxx a shiver, xxx the deer in flight xxx now chases me! 
xxxxxx land of the rising sun! xxx even for deep-mountain deer xxx lust 
xxxxxx another snake xxx into the hole... xxx three roommates 
xxxxxx mother snake, xxx leaving the hole xxx then back in 
xxxxxx mother snake, xxx a farewell to the crow xxx then down the hole 
xxxxxx in this world you're a snake, xxx enter the hole xxx toward buddha's west! 
xxxxxx just as you are xxx become buddha! xxx snake in your hole 
xxxxxx a hole made by tokuon's xxx holy staff... xxx a snake enters too 
xxxxxx the old snake xxx toward the western paradise xxx enters his hole 
xxxxxx don't go in, snake! xxx that's a hole xxx a cruel man made 
xxxxxx the snake enters, too, xxx the saint's walking stick's xxx hole 
xxxxxx from his hole the snake xxx glances back... xxx corrupt world of desire 
xxxxxx the snake has had it xxx with humans too... xxx entering his hole 
xxxxxx from his hole the snake xxx glances back... xxx corrupt world of desire 
xxxxxx in the next life xxx don't be a snake! xxx temple grounds 
xxxxxx trust in amida buddha! xxx snake inching xxx into its hole 
xxxxxx next year xxx become a butterfly! xxx snake in your hole 
xxxxxx on one side xxx the cats' quarrel, on the other xxx insects sing 
xxxxxx "it's cold!" xxx the insects' complaining xxx has begun 
xxxxxx an upset insect! xxx his whole body shakes xxx as he sings 
xxxxxx listening to the insect chorus xxx right after xxx night's second piss 
xxxxxx "the world is better! xxx better!" xxx the insect dances too 
xxxxxx insects chirp in the night, xxx what of your mothers? xxx your fathers? 
xxxxxx butterfly and dragonfly xxx are blown away... xxx fart bug 
xxxxxx coming along xxx to the bon festival... xxx red dragonfly 
xxxxxx departing for the festival xxx all in red xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the dragonfly xxx on the deer's head... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx dragonfly, xxx flying smack into xxx the dog's head 
xxxxxx under the eaves xxx the dragonfly checks in... xxx alone 
xxxxxx quickly checking in xxx for his lonely stay... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx quickly checking in xxx for his lonely stay... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx under the eaves xxx the dragonfly checks in... xxx alone 
xxxxxx blown away xxx by the fart bug... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx blown away xxx by the horse's fart... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx flying into people xxx kicking them hard... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx katydid, xxx on his way to being sold xxx still singing 
xxxxxx katydid, xxx noon and night, nothing xxx but nagging! 
xxxxxx i'm taking a leak xxx look out! look out! xxx katydid 
xxxxxx in a secret place xxx basking in the sun... xxx hermit chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx only after the chrysanthemum festival xxx festival xxx wine 
xxxxxx they've bloomed xxx for the soup stock... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx in my thatched hut xxx even the chrysanthemum xxx needs a cane 
xxxxxx carefully measured xxx by the inchworm... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx though it's red xxx it's a morning-glory! xxx morning-glory! 
xxxxxx filled with floating xxx morning-glories... xxx the teacup 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx big blossoms, little blossoms xxx rustling 
xxxxxx morning-glories xxx rustling, rustling xxx rustling! 
xxxxxx faces of morning-glories, xxx their cold and fever xxx cured 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx rustling and rustling xxx their lives away 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx even in the doorway xxx damn blooms 
xxxxxx well-behaved, xxx the white morning-glory xxx stuck-up, blooms 
xxxxxx how quiet xxx the light blue morning-glory... xxx such good manners 
xxxxxx kitten, the bush clover xxx grabbing you! xxx grabbing you! 
xxxxxx such is my homeland! xxx blooming in rice fields xxx buckwheat 
xxxxxx scent of orchids, xxx like a foreign country xxx the sickle moon 
xxxxxx all at once xxx the field is rustling... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx the dog carries some xxx to the celebration too... xxx harvested rice 
xxxxxx old man's leisure, xxx this year's tobacco too xxx becomes smoke 
xxxxxx just a little smoke, xxx the tobacco xxx smells young 
xxxxxx growing politely xxx in the vegetable patch... xxx hot peppers 
xxxxxx the kittens xxx play house xxx in the plume grass 
xxxxxx don't crawl through xxx fisherman! xxx blooming rushes 
xxxxxx cotton fluff scatters, xxx little thicket, little shrine xxx little ditch 
xxxxxx big persimmon, xxx even when it's crushed xxx it's astringent 
xxxxxx "ooo astringent!" xxx the persimmon thief's xxx laughter 
xxxxxx knocked from the persimmon tree xxx by an arrow... xxx crow 
xxxxxx i too eke out xxx a living... xxx rose of sharon 
xxxxxx a horseshoe xxx to steady its butt... xxx the gourd 
xxxxxx on the old cat's head xxx clonk! xxx falling fruit 
xxxxxx prancing about xxx with the acorn... xxx kitten 
xxxxxx a chestnut falls xxx plop! at the dog's xxx pillow 
xxxxxx in today's world xxx they're "old man beaters"... xxx chestnuts 
xxxxxx big chestnuts, xxx i'm one of you xxx with my prickly head 
xxxxxx chestnuts dropping, xxx even the stone buddha xxx with umbrella-hat! 
xxxxxx chestnuts bounced off xxx the umbrella-hat gathered... xxx by the person behind 
xxxxxx "a chestnut hit xxx an old man..." xxx a story told for ages 
xxxxxx fool cat, xxx eyes returning to where xxx the chestnut was 
xxxxxx the pitter-patter xxx of falling chestnuts... xxx a rainy night 
xxxxxx growing from the hole xxx of the wolf... xxx mouse mushroom 
xxxxxx tengu's mushrooms sprout, xxx the entrance xxx to a haunted place 
xxxxxx this deep forest xxx is haunted! xxx tengu's mushrooms sprout 
xxxxxx crushing the year's xxx first mushroom... xxx the laughing child 
xxxxxx year's first mushrooms, xxx my child xxx plays with one 
xxxxxx drawing nearer xxx to the pure land... xxx life's cold winter 
xxxxxx walking along xxx he's used to the cold... xxx shinano road 
xxxxxx after crossing it xxx now being careful... xxx ice 
xxxxxx no storehouse was ever xxx built by a non-drinker... xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx no incense xxx no farts... xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx from sitting rooms xxx into hot tubs... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx the winter rain xxx thrashes the gate's tree xxx again 
xxxxxx the winter rain xxx thrashes the gate's tree xxx in passing 
xxxxxx winter rain, xxx around basho's grave xxx falling down 
xxxxxx the winter rain xxx dumps and dumps... xxx a crossroads buddha 
xxxxxx time and again xxx foolishly persistent... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx first day of winter xxx suddenly xxx a storm 
xxxxxx my home village xxx in an ugly mood... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx from south, north xxx east, west... xxx winter storms 
xxxxxx buddha's body xxx accepts it... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx facing the river, xxx next door, it seems xxx echigo mountains 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx well at least it's a nice xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx crawling across the hanging bridge xxx minstrel priest 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx and coming down with it xxx the padded clothes 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx i see the padded clothes xxx coming down 
xxxxxx first snowfall xxx one, two, three, four xxx five, six people 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx i see the padded clothes xxx coming down 
xxxxxx first snow, xxx and coming down with it xxx the padded clothes 
xxxxxx in first snowfall xxx snow clogs crunching... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx flitting to the oil lamp xxx of the pissing place... xxx powdery snow 
xxxxxx snowflakes flitting, xxx in the whole sky xxx not a cloud 
xxxxxx from east, west xxx south, north... xxx the blizzard 
xxxxxx messing up the snow xxx like always... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx with the samisen's xxx plectrum sweeping up... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx collect hailstones! xxx hailstones! xxx in your hand 
xxxxxx on the lamp's cover xxx hailstones piling up... xxx night stall 
xxxxxx does the cactus xxx grasp the great truth? xxx morning frost 
xxxxxx frost forming, xxx such a night xxx to abandon a child! 
xxxxxx night frost, xxx the ring-ringing in my ears xxx like cicadas 
xxxxxx little monkey, xxx with the gods all gone xxx he's running amuck 
xxxxxx the god has left xxx sumiyoshi's garden... xxx still they rake it 
xxxxxx mount nara's gods xxx gone for the month... xxx the deer make love 
xxxxxx even the dog xxx gets a souvenir... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx the big dog xxx begs for a souvenir... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx frost-covered blossom xxx perfect xxx for basho's day 
xxxxxx "it's basho's death-day!" xxx he says xxx while walking 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx the fence's sparrows too xxx form a line 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx pigeons and sparrows xxx dressed for company 
xxxxxx back alley, xxx a poor sake bottle xxx for the god of wealth 
xxxxxx sweeping soot xxx with careful aim... xxx at the pilgrim 
xxxxxx corner spider xxx rest easy, my soot-broom xxx is idle 
xxxxxx with a samisen xxx the twelfth month singers... xxx our floating world! 
xxxxxx thatched hut, xxx the year's last rice cakes xxx are bought 
xxxxxx waiting for spring xxx in a house without children xxx pounding rice cakes 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx though there's no child xxx to beg for them 
xxxxxx pounding rice cakes xxx though there's no child xxx to beg for them 
xxxxxx waiting for spring xxx in a house without children xxx pounding rice cakes 
xxxxxx my rice cakes, xxx just four quarts' worth xxx but pounded with a song 
xxxxxx in my thatched hut xxx a gala night... xxx drinking away the year 
xxxxxx enshrined in the alcove, xxx my year's end gift xxx of sake 
xxxxxx the whole evening xxx walking through the village... xxx end-of-year gifts 
xxxxxx by special request xxx my paper fan xxx is exorcised 
xxxxxx shrine garden, xxx even pines are exorcised xxx of their snow 
xxxxxx the wolf makes off xxx with a piece of it... xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx now the same color xxx as my wrinkled feet... xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx with a little skullcap xxx not putting on airs... xxx god of the poor 
xxxxxx hanging bridge, xxx mere mortals just drag xxx their snow sleds 
xxxxxx pulling a snow sled xxx from the roof he tosses xxx a letter 
xxxxxx temple road, xxx his aged mother rides xxx the snow sled 
xxxxxx front gate, xxx snow falls, is swept xxx falls, is swept 
xxxxxx front gate, xxx a child is building xxx snow mountain 
xxxxxx sweeping snow, xxx even off the head xxx of holy jizo 
xxxxxx mother xxx is the frost-guard... xxx sleeping child 
xxxxxx between tofu shop xxx and the tavern... xxx my winter seclusion 
xxxxxx winter seclusion, xxx on a foul food eating xxx binge 
xxxxxx next door to the xxx hibernating snake... xxx a mouse's hole 
xxxxxx my sinful dog xxx at my side... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx sitting buddha nags xxx at the brazier... xxx standing buddha 
xxxxxx same world, xxx a buddha at the brazier xxx a buddha standing 
xxxxxx the mountain's pine wind xxx reaches xxx my charcoal fire 
xxxxxx having no faith xxx in broth... xxx taking medicine 
xxxxxx getting my natto xxx from atop its bed xxx of straw 
xxxxxx in its straw wrapper xxx my smoldering xxx natto 
xxxxxx edo shop, xxx for the soba porridge xxx customers in trousers 
xxxxxx rustic hut, xxx "come and get xxx your soba porridge!" 
xxxxxx the hawk returns it xxx to the goblin village... xxx nest-warming bird 
xxxxxx though sleeping xxx for the scops owl xxx it's a life 
xxxxxx the wren goes west xxx the mouse xxx east 
xxxxxx the withered side-field xxx in full bloom... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx the eastern sea road's xxx front door 
xxxxxx frost kills the grass xxx the coaxing voice xxx of a crow 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx the little courtesan xxx scrapes soot from a kettle 
xxxxxx just bad dreams xxx are my fate... xxx a crow caws 
xxxxxx a new year, xxx until the rain-catching stone xxx dents 
xxxxxx a new year, xxx the same nonsense xxx piled on nonsense 
xxxxxx in a few days xxx no one talks about it... xxx new year's 
xxxxxx the second "new year" comes, xxx people already xxx sick of it 
xxxxxx the second "new year" comes, xxx people already xxx sick of it 
xxxxxx the second one comes xxx already longing for the third... xxx "new year's" 
xxxxxx the second one xxx is redundant... xxx new year's celebrations 
xxxxxx the second one xxx doesn't satisfy their greed... xxx new year's celebrations 
xxxxxx at first blush xxx not a thing wrong with it... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx even i xxx have no objection xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx all the windows xxx slid wide open... xxx edo's spring 
xxxxxx all the skylights xxx open wide... xxx edo's spring 
xxxxxx there's even a foolish xxx nightingale... xxx spring window 
xxxxxx everywhere i look xxx a decent spring... xxx snow at my gate 
xxxxxx how far across xxx this deep snow? xxx for a decent spring 
xxxxxx a decent spring xxx has arrived, perhaps... xxx snow at my gate 
xxxxxx do your best, spring xxx make a decent effort... xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx just make it xxx a proper spring... xxx snow at my gate 
xxxxxx some "proper spring" xxx this is! xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx making it xxx a decent spring... xxx snow at my gate 
xxxxxx in a new bucket xxx the same water... xxx young and fresh! 
xxxxxx from one bucket xxx the year's first cold water xxx first hot water, first tea 
xxxxxx made with sooty paper xxx the stepchild's kite xxx easy to spot 
xxxxxx clinging to the kite's xxx string... xxx the sleeping child 
xxxxxx catching the kite's tail xxx with his mouth... xxx gargoyle 
xxxxxx sunset, xxx an assembly of kites xxx in the sky over the town 
xxxxxx over yonder is that xxx edo's sky? xxx a kite 
xxxxxx even while falling down xxx "happy new year!" xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx the old man's house xxx is surrounded... xxx herb pickers 
xxxxxx the garden's gate xxx left unlocked... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx mr. long-beard xxx gives them a scolding... xxx herb pickers 
xxxxxx from the short sword's xxx hilt hanging... xxx herbs 
xxxxxx letting the child xxx hold his sword... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx good for walking xxx wind blows xxx all the long day 
xxxxxx this long day xxx with this cold breeze xxx almost...not bad 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx no smoking allowed xxx in kogane plain 
xxxxxx idleness, xxx the day is so wastefully xxx long! 
xxxxxx dusted with snow xxx how they clamor! xxx the little brats 
xxxxxx the market workers xxx bare-chested... xxx spring snow falling 
xxxxxx from deep xxx in the lightning's flash... xxx spring snow falling 
xxxxxx turning the haystack xxx to compost... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx spring snow, xxx while it carouses xxx it falls 
xxxxxx oh foolish frost xxx when will you be gone? xxx be gone! 
xxxxxx the last of it, xxx a load of spring xxx frost 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx every day, day after day xxx the last frost 
xxxxxx on one side xxx snow falling, the other xxx spring rain! 
xxxxxx everyone outside xxx under the umbrella-tree... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx in spring breeze xxx his stole billowing... xxx a monk comes too 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx monkey families, too xxx take healing baths 
xxxxxx blown forth xxx by the spring breeze... xxx pilgrims 
xxxxxx in the spring breeze xxx they're out to watch the women... xxx women! 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx going down to echigo's xxx hongan temple 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx a monk in a stole accompanies xxx the village elder 
xxxxxx blown downhill xxx by evening's east wind... xxx gentle slope 
xxxxxx east wind, xxx the dog rests his chin xxx on the stake 
xxxxxx the river's mist xxx helps out the haze... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx first rainbow xxx new leaves in their glory! xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx even in spring xxx a snowstorm's thunder... xxx shinano mountain 
xxxxxx with the dripping xxx of paper umbrellas... xxx spring mist 
xxxxxx paper umbrellas xxx dripping... xxx misty kyoto 
xxxxxx there's so-and-so xxx in the mist... xxx field by the gate 
xxxxxx in thick spring mist xxx the burglar xxx laughing 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx look! spring mist xxx look! falling snow 
xxxxxx at my village xxx they watch me... xxx a thin spring mist 
xxxxxx the preacher's xxx hand gestures too... xxx lost in temple mist 
xxxxxx the preacher's xxx hand gestures too... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx the mist forms xxx a straight line... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx that shape's watching me xxx watching him... xxx thin mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers rise, xxx on the fence xxx a pouch of tea 
xxxxxx at the peak xxx of the ice's melting it finishes... xxx sermon 
xxxxxx ice melting, xxx the mountain holy man's xxx noon sermon 
xxxxxx keeping company xxx with the plum tree, xxx the gate's last snow 
xxxxxx the snow i hated xxx all at once xxx has melted away 
xxxxxx riddled with piddle xxx the last xxx snow pile 
xxxxxx farm field, xxx from the tobacco break xxx a snow-melting river 
xxxxxx the stray cat xxx sharpens his nails... xxx last snow pile 
xxxxxx on amida buddha's xxx temple clinging... xxx leftover snow 
xxxxxx lying down xxx they look like handballs... xxx spring mountains 
xxxxxx snow country, xxx snow flits down xxx on spring mountains 
xxxxxx damn it's cold xxx it's damn cold! xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx on the straw mat xxx at spring's equinox xxx shameless lice 
xxxxxx even in a field xxx a line of beggars... xxx spring equinox 
xxxxxx gate's sparrow singing, xxx until when xxx a migrating servant? 
xxxxxx the servant's hair xxx made white by migrating... xxx this year too 
xxxxxx the migrating servants xxx never really saw edo... xxx umbrella-hats wave farewell 
xxxxxx migrating servants, xxx in edo, too xxx shinano's umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx migrating servants, xxx both of them shed xxx crocodile tears 
xxxxxx old men xxx among the migrating servants... xxx this year too 
xxxxxx the pigeon coos xxx "old man, how much longer xxx a migrating servant?" 
xxxxxx lined up too xxx among the dolls... xxx dharma 
xxxxxx giving her dolls xxx a good talking-to... xxx the child 
xxxxxx she offers a piece xxx to her doll... xxx herb cake 
xxxxxx picking herbs xxx in musashi plain, dressed xxx to the nines 
xxxxxx fluttering onto xxx the lacquered umbrella-hat... xxx tea leaves 
xxxxxx granny puts on xxx her spectacles... xxx tea picking 
xxxxxx crunch! crunch! xxx a mountain rice field xxx mixed with snow 
xxxxxx plowing as much snow xxx as earth... xxx mountain rice field 
xxxxxx the same hoe xxx plows the snow too... xxx mountain rice field 
xxxxxx the big cat xxx worn out from lovemaking xxx snores 
xxxxxx the big cat xxx comes yowling for love xxx falsetto 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx with a poker face xxx comes home 
xxxxxx the cats are courting xxx bumping xxx heads 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx crisscrosses the village xxx yowling 
xxxxxx sly steps, tiptoe, xxx the cat, too xxx a secret romeo 
xxxxxx through five feet of snow xxx plowing his way... xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx lazy cat, xxx he cocks his ears xxx then back to sleep 
xxxxxx the wild cat too xxx yowls falsetto... xxx a sneaky lover 
xxxxxx "give back my child!" xxx mother sparrow chases xxx the cat 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx tensely... xxx flitting snowflakes 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx his face doesn't look xxx stuck up 
xxxxxx a substitute singer xxx for the nightingale... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx hey nightingale xxx don't pass without stopping! xxx my window 
xxxxxx the nightingale xxx splish-splash, sings xxx in the shower 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx after putting on airs xxx a bit 
xxxxxx from the great bronze xxx buddha's nose... xxx a swallow! 
xxxxxx a good day xxx for plowing the rice field... xxx swallows return! 
xxxxxx to honor the swallows arriving xxx i boil my lucky day xxx bean-paste 
xxxxxx each one xxx has plenty to say... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx circling now and then xxx to eye the children... xxx skylark 
xxxxxx come, skylark! xxx your children's thicket xxx is on fire! 
xxxxxx ripples on water, xxx beside the larks xxx a little fishing boat 
xxxxxx a wind-blown boat xxx a skylark xxx crossing paths 
xxxxxx "i won't fall xxx in the lake!" xxx brags the evening lark 
xxxxxx the wild cat xxx looks astonished... xxx a skylark 
xxxxxx the evening pheasant xxx back to sleep xxx with a great cry 
xxxxxx after the big flock xxx silence... xxx geese flying north 
xxxxxx are you planning xxx to stay in this province? xxx goose 
xxxxxx don't cry, geese! xxx in the end our parting xxx is inevitable 
xxxxxx what a thing! xxx in this deluge xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx straight out of a full moon xxx painting... xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx to the rhythm xxx of the falling snow xxx the geese depart 
xxxxxx traveling geese xxx go down to make love... xxx the town of karuizawa 
xxxxxx whether rain falls xxx or the sky xxx frogs keep croaking 
xxxxxx blindly following xxx the setting sun... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx on a makeshift bridge xxx we make friends... xxx croaking frog 
xxxxxx glaring steadily xxx at the scattering blossoms... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx they praise buddha too, xxx frogs on a rock xxx in a row 
xxxxxx praising buddha xxx in a row in a rice field... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx riding piggy-back xxx a butterfly too is a pilgrim... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx grabbing my umbrella-hat xxx i find, asleep... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx slipping off xxx the candy tray... xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx a butterfly flits, xxx an umbrella-hat and kimono xxx on the rock 
xxxxxx suddenly circling xxx the outdoor sermon... xxx little butterflies 
xxxxxx a crossroads sermon xxx gibberish xxx spring peace 
xxxxxx even the youngest child xxx urges them on... xxx silkworms 
xxxxxx tired of feeding xxx on the horse xxx the horsefly naps 
xxxxxx playing dead xxx on the horse's tail xxx a meadow horsefly 
xxxxxx divine wind, xxx the horsefly leads xxx on the mountain road 
xxxxxx "come this way!" xxx my horsefly guide xxx through the meadow 
xxxxxx leasing a spot xxx for the beehive... xxx the post 
xxxxxx the beehive dangles xxx from the deva king's xxx wrist 
xxxxxx the beehive xxx hushes up... xxx a buddhist sermon 
xxxxxx the mountain bees, too xxx yearn to live there... xxx town of people 
xxxxxx shameless xxx in my blossom-viewing robe... xxx lice 
xxxxxx grass and vines, xxx a steady march xxx toward the bamboo 
xxxxxx asleep in new grass xxx to his formal trousers xxx it clings 
xxxxxx fresh green leaves xxx sprouting turn out to be... xxx weeds! 
xxxxxx muddy road, xxx "come walk on me!" xxx grass turning green 
xxxxxx though straggly xxx soon they conquer all... xxx violets 
xxxxxx as usual xxx not quite round... xxx plum blossom moon 
xxxxxx nightingale parents xxx and children on duty too... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossom scent, xxx deep in a hole, even xxx the "floating world!" 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx singing tenjin's sutra xxx a sparrow 
xxxxxx "praise the unshackled xxx heavenly gods!" xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx sparrows singing sutras xxx to heavenly gods 
xxxxxx plum in bloom, xxx a green tatami mat xxx awaits the priest 
xxxxxx when plum trees bloom xxx hot tubs xxx overflow 
xxxxxx viewing plum blossoms, xxx they call old men xxx pickled plums 
xxxxxx little child, xxx eyes wide as saucers xxx for plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the little boy's writing brush xxx in his mouth... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx a price tag xxx dangles from his body... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even the outhouse xxx has a guardian god... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx he leaves the outhouse xxx unlatched... xxx plum blossoms! 
xxxxxx bundled in her coat xxx a woman goes out too... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even on the water bucket xxx the war lord's crest... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx with a yogi's self-denial xxx it's bloomed... xxx my gate's plum tree 
xxxxxx with a yogi's self-denial xxx they've bloomed... xxx camellias at my gate 
xxxxxx after the rain xxx the ground hardens... xxx glorious blossoms 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx even while blossom viewing xxx a little thief 
xxxxxx a straight line xxx all the way to kyoto... xxx umbrella-hatted blossom viewers 
xxxxxx a whole country xxx of favorite spots... xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx all the nondrinkers xxx seem gloomy... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx blossoms scatter, xxx even the devil xxx sheds a tear 
xxxxxx a wife, a child... xxx foretelling my fate? xxx blossoms scatter too 
xxxxxx the temple blossoms xxx without struggle xxx fall 
xxxxxx long journey, xxx the blossoms, too, have lost weight xxx on mount yoshino 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms! xxx if i were twenty years xxx younger... 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx buddha's karmic wind xxx awaits you 
xxxxxx the blossoming tree xxx born to a friendly xxx existence 
xxxxxx the blossoming tree xxx born with such good xxx karma 
xxxxxx in this world of blossoms xxx nobody longs xxx for paradise 
xxxxxx world of blossoms, xxx priests, samurai xxx merchants 
xxxxxx harvest moon-gazing xxx priests, samurai xxx merchants 
xxxxxx blossoms become clouds, xxx people become xxx smoke 
xxxxxx people clamor, xxx in the west, in the east xxx a blossom blizzard 
xxxxxx even grandpa wears xxx a "lost child" sign... xxx umbrella-hatted blossom viewer 
xxxxxx around the old man's waist xxx blossom viewing... xxx a lost child sign 
xxxxxx great yoshino, xxx waking up over clouds xxx of blossoms 
xxxxxx each one nibbles xxx his fried rice... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx on sedge hats xxx and parasols falling... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx temple to temple xxx with no rhythm... xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx down they fall xxx with no rhythm... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx to the west xxx cherry blossoms scatter... xxx amida's hongan temple 
xxxxxx granny comes too xxx led by a cow... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx down they fall xxx with no rhythm... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx temple to temple xxx with no rhythm... xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx lamplight, xxx hidden in the willow xxx young voices 
xxxxxx though it blocks xxx my view... xxx neighbor's willow 
xxxxxx around the willow xxx a floating world... xxx red blossoms 
xxxxxx the big willow xxx has become the village's xxx trademark 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx foolish flowers, clever flowers xxx bloom 
xxxxxx nowhere to lay xxx my hands or feet... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx making my life xxx a total pain... xxx summer heat 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx she eats with an appetite xxx for two 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx native citizens of the village xxx mr. and mrs. pine 
xxxxxx kindly blowing xxx under my umbrella-hat... xxx midsummer's east wind 
xxxxxx the white chrysanthemum xxx acting stuck-up... xxx midsummer 
xxxxxx people's voices xxx on ryogoku bridge even at night... xxx midsummer drought 
xxxxxx the full moon xxx is utterly flawless... xxx midsummer 
xxxxxx such is our age, xxx rainy season thunder xxx but no rain 
xxxxxx this village lacks xxx the spirit of the day... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx not falling xxx on the insincere village? xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx not falling xxx on the insincere village? xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx this village lacks xxx the spirit of the day... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx while i watched xxx two cloudbursts in a row... xxx that village yonder 
xxxxxx just now xxx two cloudbursts in a row... xxx that village yonder 
xxxxxx left out xxx of the cloudburst... xxx the little village 
xxxxxx come the second cloudburst xxx people xxx are griping 
xxxxxx cloudbursts, xxx one after another xxx again and again! 
xxxxxx in that throng xxx there must be a demon... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx rift in the clouds, xxx how easily peaks xxx pop up 
xxxxxx the floating cloud xxx pushes up peaks xxx with ease 
xxxxxx rice country, xxx even at night standing tall xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx with ease xxx they reconstruct... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx rushing to put away xxx the tatami mats... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx plugging the hole xxx with a pine tree... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx making their entrance xxx from the lake... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx the rice planter's xxx sunshade... xxx billowing cloud 
xxxxxx at the peak xxx maybe it's snowing... xxx pure mountain water 
xxxxxx through a village of people xxx the water no longer xxx pure 
xxxxxx pure mountain water, xxx people coming and going xxx muddy it 
xxxxxx evening wind, xxx disease-free xxx the rice field greens 
xxxxxx butterflies xxx like celestial maidens... xxx buddha amid birthday flowers 
xxxxxx year after year xxx deigning to be born... xxx buddha 
xxxxxx two or three pennies xxx complete the scene... xxx buddha amid birthday flowers 
xxxxxx an outhouse song too xxx one of my choices... xxx summer calligraphy 
xxxxxx the kitten grasps xxx its ball... xxx summer calligraphy stone 
xxxxxx "good fortune!" xxx the summer banner xxx riddled with patches 
xxxxxx "good fortune" xxx indeed xxx banner with many patches 
xxxxxx rice dumpling in bamboo grass, xxx skillfully the cat xxx unwraps it 
xxxxxx from his long-lobed ear xxx a gift dangles... xxx rice dumpling 
xxxxxx this land of gods! xxx medicine rains xxx from the sky 
xxxxxx fall from the sky today! xxx wrinkle-curing xxx medicine 
xxxxxx the day medicine rains xxx a stinging bug, too xxx falls from a tree 
xxxxxx on honest heads xxx medicine rains down xxx today 
xxxxxx the man with his nose xxx in the air is first... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx hungry devil xxx you, too, look down in shame... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx while putting it on xxx the price is settled... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx thatched hut, xxx like everyone the child changes xxx to summer clothes 
xxxxxx my new summer robe, xxx though i say i'm sick xxx of this world 
xxxxxx first day of summer xxx and like it or not... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx "rice paste" xxx on a round sign board... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx past noon xxx acting on impulse... xxx a new summer robe 
xxxxxx insect hairpins xxx and hair pieces too... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx you don't think how this flesh xxx will soon burn... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx summer kimonos xxx the color of blue sky... xxx morning pilgrimage 
xxxxxx holy man, xxx even while plucking grass xxx a parasol holder 
xxxxxx old priest, xxx even while plucking grass xxx a parasol holder 
xxxxxx even while plucking xxx the grass at the gate... xxx a parasol 
xxxxxx the good cat xxx hides his claws... xxx summer room 
xxxxxx this year there's someone xxx for nagging... xxx summer room 
xxxxxx dangling a mosquito net xxx out to dinner xxx i go 
xxxxxx what a pain! xxx inside the mosquito net xxx with my little sake cup 
xxxxxx "borrowed two quarts xxx of sake"... xxx a note in my mosquito net 
xxxxxx on the back of an ox xxx hauling straw... xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx osaka, xxx on the back of an ox xxx a siesta 
xxxxxx a sneeze xxx a cover-up... xxx with her fan 
xxxxxx by noon xxx it's over the desk xxx smudge pot smoke 
xxxxxx samurai street, xxx methodically he waters xxx the plants 
xxxxxx on a stone xxx by the drained well... xxx sacred sake 
xxxxxx the well's bottom, too xxx utterly dry... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx calling down, xxx from deep in the well xxx an answer 
xxxxxx after cleaning the well xxx putting back the fish... xxx moon at dusk 
xxxxxx the well is drained, xxx on the grass a frog xxx croaking 
xxxxxx a popular song, xxx from the bottom of the well xxx he joins in 
xxxxxx rest break, xxx from the bottom of the well xxx voices 
xxxxxx a traveler xxx walking along, airing xxx out his clothes 
xxxxxx evening cool, xxx the great high priest xxx tells jokes 
xxxxxx in today's world xxx it's half for show... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx even a big toad xxx boldly joins the fun... xxx rice-planting sake 
xxxxxx taking off his umbrella-hat xxx a bald priest... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx even worthless me xxx is invited... xxx rice-planting sake 
xxxxxx the young men wear them xxx half for show... xxx rice-planting umbrella-hats 
xxxxxx a penny's worth of xxx cold water, the horse xxx drinks too 
xxxxxx moonlight, xxx even at night they sell water xxx on nihon bridge 
xxxxxx cold water, xxx scooped into a bucket xxx just water 
xxxxxx mount ausaka, xxx from a cow's back xxx sweet jelly 
xxxxxx sweet jelly, xxx from a cow's back xxx is served 
xxxxxx oblivious xxx to the hunter's arrows... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx the fawn xxx unaware of the arrow xxx cavorts 
xxxxxx hearing the holy man's xxx sermon... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx growing up xxx in the thick of chickens... xxx a fawn 
xxxxxx over eight pounds, xxx don't haul that! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx unwilling to back down xxx even an inch... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't back down xxx even an inch! xxx cuckoo of great edo 
xxxxxx that's a heavy load xxx to be hauling! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx breaking out in song xxx on a whim... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't eat xxx lying down like that! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx what are you eating xxx to make such a noise! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the cuckoo sings xxx "watch out! the sake's xxx burning!" 
xxxxxx does the caged xxx nightingale hear? xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx tree at the gate, xxx morning to evening xxx a mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx by common consent xxx the nightingales' singing xxx stops 
xxxxxx the nightingale, too xxx isn't growing old! xxx hot springs mountain 
xxxxxx noisy reed thrush, xxx the big river flows xxx in silence 
xxxxxx reed thrush, xxx what's chasing you xxx to make you sing all night? 
xxxxxx hey reed thrush xxx the whole town's xxx sound asleep! 
xxxxxx moonlight, xxx one reed thrush xxx working, singing 
xxxxxx so many! xxx on the shore at a hut of reeds xxx reed thrushes 
xxxxxx the reed thrush too xxx uses the moonlight... xxx night work 
xxxxxx reed thrush xxx on a bamboo stalk's xxx tippy-top 
xxxxxx a reed thrush sings, xxx "the water thief is here! xxx he's here!" 
xxxxxx on buddha's lap xxx a snake's forsaken xxx garment 
xxxxxx on top xxx of a sleeping man's butt... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx up to heaven xxx the mosquito larva flies... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx coming to lunch xxx on the sleeping man... xxx mosquito 
xxxxxx green tatami mat, xxx a fly lands xxx with a thump 
xxxxxx swat! swat! xxx the escaping fly buzzes xxx with laughter 
xxxxxx fly away quick xxx quick! don't get swatted! xxx fly over there 
xxxxxx just for fun xxx the cat catches them... xxx window's flies 
xxxxxx knowing the priest is blind xxx is that why you stay? xxx fleas on the mat 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx these eyes no good xxx for flea chasing 
xxxxxx a new tatami mat, xxx fleas jumping xxx bumpity bump! 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even in mountain pine shade xxx fleas 
xxxxxx evening hut, xxx the fleas jumping xxx bumpity-bump 
xxxxxx pillar at the gate, xxx have you become all xxx flying ants? 
xxxxxx my hut's pillar xxx today is transformed... xxx flying ants 
xxxxxx twice as big xxx as yesterday... xxx flying ant swarm 
xxxxxx my hut's pillar xxx today is transformed... xxx flying ants 
xxxxxx pillar at the gate, xxx have you become all xxx flying ants? 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx viewed from the mountain xxx a big sitting room 
xxxxxx the soft breeze xxx from the cicada's voice xxx wafts 
xxxxxx like dribbles xxx of rain the singing xxx cicadas 
xxxxxx so many cicadas xxx singing and tumbling off... xxx umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx sweltering heat, xxx the knotweed-eating bug xxx in fine mood 
xxxxxx where there's knotweed xxx there's the knotweed-eating xxx bug 
xxxxxx where there's people xxx there's flies xxx and buddhas 
xxxxxx some eat knotweed xxx some fly into flames... xxx a matter of taste 
xxxxxx some sing all night xxx some eat knotweed... xxx a matter of taste 
xxxxxx all the baby spiders xxx scatter xxx to make a living 
xxxxxx little snail xxx facing this way xxx where to now? 
xxxxxx just coming out xxx the earthworm dragged off xxx by ants 
xxxxxx peonies, xxx the swords stowed xxx at the watchman's shack 
xxxxxx the lock unlocked xxx for visitors... xxx peony garden 
xxxxxx lotuses in the pond, xxx no desire to bloom xxx golden 
xxxxxx house in the country, xxx when will the lotuses xxx bloom? 
xxxxxx from the rear xxx of the outcastes' house... xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx lotuses blooming large xxx even at the house xxx in the country 
xxxxxx blooming lotuses xxx where sewer water xxx pours 
xxxxxx amid the muck xxx a lotus defiantly xxx has bloomed 
xxxxxx they even sell xxx the swamp's lotuses... xxx leaf and blossom 
xxxxxx after feasting on people xxx the horsefly mounts xxx the lotus 
xxxxxx blooming pinks, xxx when planted by people xxx growing thin so fast 
xxxxxx the traveler fixes xxx the farmer's floating xxx rice stalks 
xxxxxx fat and round xxx the shining moon... xxx the priest's barley field 
xxxxxx the black ones xxx sown by a crow... xxx heads of barley 
xxxxxx ripened barley, xxx even the foundation stone xxx sweats 
xxxxxx the thicket's bamboo xxx imitating his parents xxx grows crooked 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots' substitute, xxx bamboo xxx grass 
xxxxxx new bamboo grass xxx all one width... xxx deep shinano 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, too, xxx when they grow up xxx grow skinny 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots xxx that become bamboo... xxx one in ten thousand 
xxxxxx growing up together, xxx bamboo shoots xxx and baby sparrows 
xxxxxx even for bamboo shoots xxx there's no escape... xxx floating world 
xxxxxx purification font, xxx a muskmelon xxx left to cool 
xxxxxx a mount fuji xxx emerges from clouds... xxx first eggplant 
xxxxxx from one paper fan xxx to another... xxx the first eggplant 
xxxxxx today too xxx i don't break it off... xxx first eggplant 
xxxxxx humble hut, xxx today the first eggplant xxx if someone gives me one! 
xxxxxx humble hut, xxx today the first eggplant xxx if someone gives me one! 
xxxxxx today too xxx i don't break it off... xxx first eggplant 
xxxxxx amid the garden shrubbery, xxx eggplant's xxx protective charm 
xxxxxx raised with a protective xxx charm... xxx the first eggplant 
xxxxxx in my open palms xxx look! xxx the first eggplant 
xxxxxx raised in a pot xxx just for show... xxx the first eggplant 
xxxxxx raised with a protective xxx charm... xxx the first eggplant 
xxxxxx amid the garden shrubbery, xxx eggplant's xxx protective charm 
xxxxxx i show it off xxx to buddha... xxx first eggplant 
xxxxxx the monk practices xxx calligraphy xxx in the shade of new leaves 
xxxxxx though spattered xxx with kicked-up mud... xxx deutzia in full bloom 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx here's a new path xxx through the hedge 
xxxxxx leaving the muddy road xxx and the blooming deutzia xxx behind 
xxxxxx thorn hedge, xxx the dog crawls through xxx like a pro 
xxxxxx even the thorn bush xxx bows low! xxx amida's hongan temple 
xxxxxx poking her nose xxx into thorny wild roses... xxx kitten 
xxxxxx through the thorny hedge xxx cleverly... xxx dog's path 
xxxxxx worth a look, xxx the thorny hedge, too xxx in full bloom 
xxxxxx "autumn's begun" xxx just saying it xxx feels cold 
xxxxxx don't blame the wind xxx don't hate! xxx first autumn morning 
xxxxxx deep in morning's cold xxx i visit... xxx zenko temple 
xxxxxx the stomped-at mouse xxx squeaks with laughter... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx autumn in the hut, xxx cold day xxx cold night 
xxxxxx the buck's mood xxx improves... xxx a cold night 
xxxxxx at the window xxx insects too xxx a cold night huddle 
xxxxxx i know this wall scribbler's xxx name... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx friends of mine xxx scrawled on this wall... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx friends of mine xxx scrawled on this wall... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx i know this wall scribbler's xxx name... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx autumn also xxx hurries to the west... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx mountain shade, xxx here, too, a festival crowd xxx under the milky way 
xxxxxx does my star too xxx sleep alone? xxx milky way 
xxxxxx a bon festival moon xxx but nobody visiting xxx the graves 
xxxxxx a big rain, xxx this harvest moon night xxx an ordinary mountain 
xxxxxx after cleaning the big well xxx and the little well... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx it's become a top-notch xxx harvest moon! xxx rain-drenched grass 
xxxxxx on harvest moon night xxx in bush clover and plume grass... xxx rain gazing 
xxxxxx on harvest moon night xxx surpassing the moon... xxx mountain rain 
xxxxxx harvest moon night, xxx instead of the moon xxx leaking rain 
xxxxxx on harvest moon night xxx greeting the moon... xxx with snores 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx still looking like a newborn xxx garden's pine 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx in a little pine island's xxx little nook 
xxxxxx autumn begins, xxx in a little pine island's xxx little nook 
xxxxxx the harvest moon xxx over mountain and river... xxx while i sleep 
xxxxxx no sign of weakness xxx in the autumn wind... xxx mosquito 
xxxxxx sharpening the blades xxx of grass... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx blades of grass, too xxx stab people... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx a black butterfly xxx also flits by... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx a finger pointing xxx to the west... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx so many castaway xxx snail shells! xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx on the back window xxx dewdrops scatter xxx loudly 
xxxxxx the child unaware xxx of the silver dewdrops xxx a buddha 
xxxxxx even on the rice field xxx workers... xxx dewdrops form 
xxxxxx on the flower vendor's xxx flowers... xxx pearls of dew 
xxxxxx is my hut an eye-sore xxx among your pearls? xxx dewy grass? 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx no way to hide xxx the wrinkles 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx in the field xxx a hot tub bather 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx a seaside man's xxx grave mound 
xxxxxx mist clearing, xxx at my feet xxx a buddha! 
xxxxxx cloud and fog, xxx under my sleeves xxx they pass 
xxxxxx from people's mouths, too xxx mist in clouds... xxx hokkaido 
xxxxxx from people's mouths, too xxx cold mist... xxx hokkaido 
xxxxxx choking on the mist xxx blowing in... xxx on horseback 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx in buddha's lap mist xxx rising 
xxxxxx autumn mountain, xxx on a rainless day xxx a gale 
xxxxxx after merriment xxx in the moonlight... xxx a grave visit 
xxxxxx at times i use it xxx to find my shoes... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx two back-alley homes xxx share it... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx if you come and look xxx at this farmhouse... xxx a tall bon lantern 
xxxxxx even grass and vines xxx don't part willingly... xxx lantern for the dead 
xxxxxx night work lit xxx by a lantern for the dead... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx the shoes guarded xxx by the temple's lantern... xxx for the dead 
xxxxxx the crybaby dances xxx with mother... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx in sixty years xxx not one night spent xxx dancing 
xxxxxx cool air of tanabata night xxx coats the bamboo xxx with dew 
xxxxxx tanabata night, xxx in the field maiden flowers xxx and boy flowers 
xxxxxx the "star poem" xxx written on his arm... xxx is licked 
xxxxxx mid-river xxx they cool themselves... xxx husband and wife stars 
xxxxxx as an added treat xxx cool wind blows... xxx bedroom of stars 
xxxxxx don't cry, insects, xxx lovers part xxx even among the stars 
xxxxxx moonlight, xxx even the mountain's plume grass xxx has a festival! 
xxxxxx an old god xxx old plume grass... xxx a famous resort 
xxxxxx ripe plume grass, xxx did the wind blowing you xxx come from lake suwa? 
xxxxxx his figure intertwined xxx with day flowers... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx the puppy passes by xxx to admire it... xxx bird clapper 
xxxxxx this blessing xxx not allowed in paradise... xxx new sake 
xxxxxx tied to the young xxx buck's antler... xxx a letter 
xxxxxx they cry to each other xxx across a river xxx deer in love 
xxxxxx barking, xxx in a village without dogs xxx cries of deer 
xxxxxx the shrike hurling xxx threats xxx at the persimmon thief 
xxxxxx a shrike sings xxx "from now on, no meat xxx no fish!" 
xxxxxx seeing off xxx a big gang in the sky... xxx rice field geese 
xxxxxx how prudent! xxx the geese post guards xxx awake, asleep 
xxxxxx getting used xxx to all the scoldings... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx the copycat sparrows xxx fly along... xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx what business brings you xxx back the wrong way? xxx migrating bird 
xxxxxx poor imitators xxx of the migrating birds... xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx still not in your hole xxx even now? xxx water snake 
xxxxxx even the stone-hard camphor tree xxx devoured xxx by insects 
xxxxxx voices of insects, too, xxx night work xxx ruckus 
xxxxxx in a peaceful world xxx a mad frolic... xxx insects singing! 
xxxxxx still singing the insect xxx is swept away... xxx floating branch 
xxxxxx don't sing, insects! xxx observe a period xxx of silence 
xxxxxx the insects outside xxx are grumbling too... xxx house in the trees 
xxxxxx a cicada xxx cools it down... xxx shade of the house 
xxxxxx buzzing and teasing xxx the horse's ear... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the horse's nose xxx gives him a sniff... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx dragonfly, xxx like what people use xxx in their looms 
xxxxxx like the weaver's xxx chopstick for her loom... xxx a dragonfly 
xxxxxx flying in formation xxx right through the town... xxx red dragonflies 
xxxxxx wildflowers xxx trampled thanks xxx to the mushrooms! 
xxxxxx wildflowers, xxx in the depths of the dew xxx the bell tolls 
xxxxxx big chrysanthemum, xxx in my walking stick's shadow xxx it blooms 
xxxxxx it too becomes food xxx in the secluded house... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum garden, xxx i bow my head xxx "to the left! the left!" 
xxxxxx "come this way!" xxx a chrysanthemum stands xxx in the doorway 
xxxxxx "this way, pass through xxx pass through!" xxx the gate's chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx "this way to the inside, xxx pass through!" xxx gate's chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx "pass through this way!" xxx standing in the gate xxx a chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx nondrinkers xxx stay out! xxx gate to the chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx letting the samurai xxx hold the sake dipper... xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx it's also xxx a white capped mountain... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx don't hit your head xxx on the gate! xxx chrysanthemum garden 
xxxxxx for my defeated chrysanthemum xxx a second hard look... xxx all alone 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx even in the pissing place xxx a chrysanthemum! 
xxxxxx blooming alongside xxx the devil bramble... xxx a maiden flower 
xxxxxx some hidden xxx by the pine tree... xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx ivy dangles xxx in my rice bowl... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx my fence, xxx the floating world's arrowroot xxx in full bloom 
xxxxxx garnishing the wildflower xxx bouquet... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx the children load up xxx the dog... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx the traveler clips some xxx in the thicket... xxx heads of rice 
xxxxxx is half of it xxx human sweat? xxx rice field dew 
xxxxxx adding to my hut's xxx thatch, a smidgen xxx of plume grass 
xxxxxx taking turns xxx down the little waterfall... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx a broken bowl also xxx floats downstream... xxx tachida river 
xxxxxx cooling the back xxx of the valley stream... xxx evening's red leaves 
xxxxxx the rubbish heap's xxx special ingredient... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx the puppy sprawling xxx for a nap... xxx a fallen leaf 
xxxxxx paulownia tree, xxx in the unfallen leaf xxx lives a bug 
xxxxxx the paulownia leaf xxx becomes xxx my rosary holder 
xxxxxx blessedly serving xxx as a rosary holder... xxx the fallen leaf 
xxxxxx in the mud xxx after the flood, one rose xxx of sharon 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx even for mountain chestnuts xxx a night watchman 
xxxxxx an indomitable soul, xxx a chestnut husk xxx a false tooth 
xxxxxx watching the sea xxx sitting on the lawn... xxx roasted mushrooms 
xxxxxx emma, judge of hell, xxx have a bite of laughing xxx mushrooms! 
xxxxxx mushroom hunt, xxx into my own pit xxx i fall 
xxxxxx the chicken xxx scratches up xxx a mushroom 
xxxxxx the road to paradise xxx draws nearer... xxx winter cold 
xxxxxx down to the bone xxx bitter cold... xxx a little lantern 
xxxxxx buying from the vendor xxx through the cat's door... xxx it's cold! 
xxxxxx buying from the vendor xxx through the cat's door... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx an apology to send, xxx my ink-stone's xxx thick ice 
xxxxxx upon writing a note xxx of apology, ice xxx in my ink-stone 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx with a pull-saw cutting xxx icicles 
xxxxxx backstreet, xxx on the year's last day xxx a lover cat 
xxxxxx with a winnow the boy xxx covers his head... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx tens of thousands of birds xxx cursing! 
xxxxxx in the year's xxx first snowstorm a treasure! xxx the piss-pot 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx in a splendid mood xxx sir crow 
xxxxxx first snowfall, xxx i'm so lucky the tavern's xxx next door 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx i say but then xxx go to sleep 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx i say... xxx "let's go to bed" 
xxxxxx "first snowfall, blah-blah" xxx people in the world xxx talk 
xxxxxx the dogs xxx make way for me... xxx snowy road 
xxxxxx not knowing that xxx autumn's begun, puppy xxx buddha! 
xxxxxx children eat snow xxx soaking xxx in the hot spring 
xxxxxx beggars talking xxx under a bridge... xxx a beggarly snow 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx plugging up the bath xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx frosty night, xxx ringing a bell for the lost child xxx 'round a corner 
xxxxxx from today on xxx may my medicine work! xxx welcoming the gods 
xxxxxx gorging himself xxx on the temple's gruel... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx after licking the temple's gruel xxx talking xxx sparrows 
xxxxxx for my winter voice drills xxx chanting praises xxx to buddha! 
xxxxxx for my winter voice drills xxx "praise buddha!"... xxx insomnia 
xxxxxx winter voice drills xxx in the beggar's little hut... xxx little girl 
xxxxxx trailing behind xxx the dog barks along... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx from a straw basket xxx the cat's face... xxx by the hearth 
xxxxxx growing old, xxx by the hearth's light xxx piecework 
xxxxxx bamboo soot-broom, xxx buddha's face too xxx gets a smack 
xxxxxx soot sweeping, xxx i do it xxx with a doll 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers, xxx don't forget xxx my house in the trees! 
xxxxxx tree shade, xxx an old man pounds rice cakes xxx alone 
xxxxxx in thicket shade xxx an old man pounds rice cakes xxx alone 
xxxxxx old granny teaches xxx her secret... xxx rice cakes perfectly round 
xxxxxx with the old pine xxx the two of us... xxx forgetting the year 
xxxxxx my child takes a tumble xxx on purpose... xxx the year's last day 
xxxxxx after this night xxx a new year dawns! xxx children 
xxxxxx driving out demons xxx sweeping out beans... xxx now i sit cross-legged 
xxxxxx on a restless journey xxx by a brazier, a year xxx older 
xxxxxx the cat at my xxx dinner tray too... xxx a year older 
xxxxxx even for paper robe xxx wearers... xxx fashion trends 
xxxxxx an indomitable spirit xxx suits paper robes... xxx they say 
xxxxxx on the head xxx of the sacred bamboo... xxx winter skullcap 
xxxxxx trying the red socks xxx on his hands... xxx the child 
xxxxxx my big toes xxx stick out, such well-worn xxx toe socks! 
xxxxxx so old, xxx even covering myself with a quilt xxx "heave ho!" 
xxxxxx tucked in a little quilt xxx in vines, asleep... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx while sick xxx i wear it on my head... xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx holy jizo xxx is my scapegoat... xxx snowballs 
xxxxxx right behind xxx the outhouse... xxx my winter retreat 
xxxxxx back to back, xxx the outhouse xxx and my winter retreat 
xxxxxx buying from the vendor xxx through the cat's door... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx buying from the vendor xxx through the cat's door... xxx it's cold! 
xxxxxx the slander parties xxx begin... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx my parents xxx hugged it this way, once... xxx hot water bottle 
xxxxxx moving and moving xxx then back where it started... xxx foot-warmer 
xxxxxx the priest who lost xxx the lottery won't give it up... xxx hot water bottle 
xxxxxx my love life, xxx all night long xxx with my foot-warmer 
xxxxxx the child lays it xxx on his head... xxx foot warmer 
xxxxxx by the charcoal fire xxx after the moon has set xxx a crow caws 
xxxxxx they even cut charcoal xxx with a saw! xxx life in kyoto 
xxxxxx weighing charcoal, xxx one measure buys xxx peace of mind 
xxxxxx a hard choice, xxx round charcoal, nuggets xxx or white 
xxxxxx for the old priest xxx breaking charcoal... xxx a feat 
xxxxxx a bulbul-bird bustles xxx around inspecting... xxx vegetables hung to dry 
xxxxxx even snake sushi xxx is given a try... xxx winter medicine 
xxxxxx even the cat xxx lines up for his share... xxx taking medicine 
xxxxxx my life alone, xxx just to take medicine xxx a trip to kyoto 
xxxxxx my life alone, xxx all the way to ryogoku bridge xxx for medicine 
xxxxxx thin wall, xxx from the mouse's hole xxx a wren! 
xxxxxx snow country, xxx dirt floor's little corner xxx a leek garden 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx the deer's bowl xxx upside-down 
xxxxxx making the wind blow xxx in edo... xxx hokkaido 
xxxxxx by itself xxx my head bows... xxx mount kamiji 
xxxxxx a new year, xxx an edo born and bred xxx black pine 
xxxxxx plum trees will bloom xxx but first the new year's xxx edicts 
xxxxxx by first month's xxx second day, second day... xxx lazy again 
xxxxxx first month, second day xxx the laziness xxx begins 
xxxxxx for new year's xxx he's decorated his little shop... xxx gatekeeper 
xxxxxx even pissing xxx should be done with care... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx even the snow falls xxx graciously... xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx the samurai street xxx perfectly silent xxx spring's first dawn 
xxxxxx spring begins, xxx more foolishness xxx for this fool 
xxxxxx in first month xxx even a gruel of greens xxx a celebration 
xxxxxx there's so little xxx i do it in my head... xxx new year's inventory 
xxxxxx even mount fuji xxx makes the list... xxx new year's inventory 
xxxxxx hidden in shadows xxx a laughing mouse... xxx new year's inventory 
xxxxxx her new year's present xxx laid on her head... xxx little child 
xxxxxx clamoring for new year's xxx gifts, children xxx and grandchildren 
xxxxxx spread out xxx alongside the pestle xxx the new almanac 
xxxxxx which lucky direction xxx for drinking sake? xxx the new almanac 
xxxxxx while grasping xxx mama's breast... xxx the year's first laughter 
xxxxxx a beggar receives xxx alms, the year's first xxx laughter 
xxxxxx the cat steals xxx a new year's nap... xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx even the lap-baby xxx joins in... xxx year's first song 
xxxxxx year's first water, xxx even a floating straw xxx they call "lucky!" 
xxxxxx stepchild, xxx the kite covered with patches xxx is his 
xxxxxx like in the beginning xxx just one helping... xxx zoni on the table 
xxxxxx imitating others xxx hardening their teeth... xxx tofu for me 
xxxxxx pounding the seven herbs, xxx my next door neighbor xxx in sync 
xxxxxx year's first birdsong, xxx and not a foolish xxx crow! 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx despite it all... xxx winter lingers 
xxxxxx "fair weather by spring's equinox" xxx so they say... xxx liars! 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx no incense xxx no farts 
xxxxxx a chicken strolls xxx through the sitting room... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx the light spring snow xxx melts alongside it... xxx snow in the thicket 
xxxxxx the light spring snow xxx accompanies out xxx the snow in the thicket 
xxxxxx into the red dish xxx flitting down... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx a melting escort xxx for snow in the thicket... xxx spring snow 
xxxxxx on the white blanket xxx of snow... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx even in a mountain village xxx a public bath is ready... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx even a samurai is blown xxx down the slope 
xxxxxx wearing brocade xxx he walks in the night... xxx hazy moon 
xxxxxx shinano road, xxx spring mist xxx and snow falling 
xxxxxx sky-blue umbrellas xxx in the mist too... xxx gentle slope 
xxxxxx the great bronze buddha xxx cloaked xxx in red mist 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx from the hut's garden xxx mount tsukuba 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx in front of the noodle shop xxx a chopstick mountain 
xxxxxx the gate's melting snow xxx forms the word xxx "rice!" 
xxxxxx one push xxx is all red leaves... xxx river of melting snow 
xxxxxx fixing the unevenness xxx in the rice-seedling bed... xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx snow falls xxx instead of blossoms... xxx buddha's death-day 
xxxxxx temple town, xxx for the dog, too xxx an equinox dumpling 
xxxxxx migrating servants xxx crossing the mountain see... xxx kyoto's sky 
xxxxxx becoming a man xxx this migrating servant... xxx a little child 
xxxxxx a hundred miles to edo xxx and his new job... xxx the child servant 
xxxxxx with traveling umbrella-hats xxx migrating servants sing... xxx edo hillside 
xxxxxx migrating servants, xxx about ten xxx on the steep slope 
xxxxxx to the doll's shelf xxx he comes crapping... xxx sparrow 
xxxxxx leaving just enough room xxx for a man to walk... xxx plowing the rice field 
xxxxxx plowing the field xxx listening to xxx the sermon 
xxxxxx the plowman lets me xxx cross his field... xxx temple pilgrimage 
xxxxxx he lets me cross xxx his field... xxx night of winter prayers 
xxxxxx mountain man, xxx off to plow his field xxx five, six miles away 
xxxxxx on a rainy night xxx banished from the house xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx not a peek xxx at hell's mirror? xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx mother cat xxx steals for her kittens... xxx run faster! 
xxxxxx from the human race xxx for her kittens' sake... xxx mother cat steals 
xxxxxx at your house xxx the sparrow, too xxx makes a home 
xxxxxx sharing the food xxx in the cat's dish... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx in and out xxx of prison it goes... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx the nightingale's secret, xxx the rubbish heap xxx is a luxury 
xxxxxx the nightingale's voice xxx sounds young... xxx pure water over moss 
xxxxxx is it a golden vine xxx you've found? xxx pheasant's cry 
xxxxxx daybreak, xxx in a rooster-less village xxx a pheasant's cry 
xxxxxx drinking edo's water xxx at last... xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx honking while they drink xxx edo's water... xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx it's become a world xxx of pale blue butterflies! xxx pale blue skullcaps! 
xxxxxx sitting room xxx from one corner to another... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx caged bird, xxx watching the butterfly xxx with envy 
xxxxxx dessert tray, xxx from my chopstick's tip xxx a little butterfly flies 
xxxxxx meadow butterfly xxx why are you sulking? xxx all day 
xxxxxx the butterfly flits xxx when baby crawls xxx when baby crawls 
xxxxxx one butterfly xxx apart from the crowd... xxx are you sulking? 
xxxxxx from the rubbish mountain xxx taking off... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx hot tub, xxx from head to head flitting xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx picking baby grass xxx off the rooftops 
xxxxxx for the budding trees' spring xxx a little bird xxx gushes song 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx gleaming from the hands xxx the rubbed buddha 
xxxxxx hereabouts xxx are we still in edo? xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx even while pooping xxx reading his almanac... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the distant mountain's xxx blossoms cast their light... xxx back window 
xxxxxx ready to fall xxx for baby's first cry... xxx blossoms and coins 
xxxxxx the man climbs xxx for a view of edo... xxx blossoming mountains 
xxxxxx clouds of blossoms xxx below me... xxx waking up 
xxxxxx great yoshino, xxx waking up over clouds xxx of blossoms 
xxxxxx sky-blue parasols xxx one by one... xxx blossom clouds 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx the pretty women of kyoto xxx cheeks wrapped in scarves 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx in yonder field xxx pooping and pissing 
xxxxxx straw sandals stomp xxx on fallen blossoms... xxx they snore 
xxxxxx on little straw mats xxx tired of the blossoms... xxx they snore 
xxxxxx wearing umbrella-hats xxx they enter the blossom xxx clouds 
xxxxxx we watch xxx with new year's eyes... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx at a village called xxx mountain monkey... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx at the good place xxx they show a kneecap! xxx drooping willow 
xxxxxx when night falls xxx whores tug at sleeves... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx though sixth month xxx it's strangely cold... xxx a time-tolling bell 
xxxxxx sixth month, xxx just for the old folks xxx a bright moon 
xxxxxx at the edge xxx of the sweltering day... xxx burning charcoal 
xxxxxx from blades of grass xxx a hot wind blows... xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx reflected xxx off the flooded river... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx even the cool breeze xxx doesn't feel right... xxx a crow caws 
xxxxxx cool breeze, xxx from buddha's direction xxx blowing a blessing 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx wherever you live xxx it's mount fuji! 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx the sound of well water xxx drawn at night 
xxxxxx from the morning-glory's xxx blossom xxx midsummer begins 
xxxxxx for the nightingale xxx there's no break... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx this rain xxx a greeting card from heaven... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx three raindrops xxx a greeting card from heaven... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx is the wind xxx on summer vacation? xxx grassy field 
xxxxxx from today on xxx the rain's summer vacation... xxx midsummer heat 
xxxxxx soaking in a hot tub xxx midsummer's heat forgotten... xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx beating a song xxx on the old keg 
xxxxxx a rainstorm, xxx running to the castle xxx village headman and sergeant 
xxxxxx to the imperial palace xxx five or six horsemen rushing xxx wintry blast 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx using an old keg xxx for a pillow 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx in his straw raincoat xxx snoring loud 
xxxxxx clinging to a twig xxx a frog cheers... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx did my feathered fan xxx summon you? xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx the child snores xxx the mother pounds straw... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx her child tucked in xxx she washes his clothes... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx summer mountain, xxx nightingale, pheasant xxx and cuckoo! 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx pure water xxx husks the rice 
xxxxxx the green rice field's dew xxx my side dish... xxx drinking alone 
xxxxxx same color xxx as the clear blue sky... xxx parasol 
xxxxxx making mountain xxx water husk the rice... xxx midday nap 
xxxxxx a white fan, xxx the sound of wind xxx sounds new! 
xxxxxx the general cools off xxx his horse... xxx white paper fan 
xxxxxx also left hanging xxx in the pine... xxx the farmer's paper fan 
xxxxxx shielding a wrinkled xxx face... xxx paper fan of edo 
xxxxxx wind blowing xxx paper fans rustling xxx rustling 
xxxxxx the orphan xxx makes his from scratch... xxx wastepaper fan 
xxxxxx in my hand xxx the same paper fan xxx now feels heavy 
xxxxxx knowing the bell xxx rings away life... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx not knowing the bell xxx rings away life... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx at the gate xxx scattering hot water... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx unaware xxx the tree is cursed... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx the cursed cedar xxx growing fat... xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx inspecting the fence xxx thoroughly... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx blown off by a snort xxx of the red horse... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx blown away xxx by the horse's fart... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx temple in the thicket, xxx from amida buddha's lap xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx settling again xxx on the sake cup i hold... xxx tiger moth 
xxxxxx big caterpillar, xxx into the ants' hell xxx it has fallen 
xxxxxx a pesky mosquito xxx though raised xxx in kyoto 
xxxxxx the sliding door's xxx decorative pattern... xxx fly shit 
xxxxxx where there's people xxx there's flies xxx and buddhas 
xxxxxx where there's knotweed xxx there's the knotweed-eating xxx bug 
xxxxxx swarming flies xxx how do my wrinkled hands xxx taste? 
xxxxxx taking a siesta xxx with the farmer... xxx a snail 
xxxxxx the crow xxx has snatched it away... xxx cooling melon 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms xxx in full bloom xxx and a real snowstorm! 
xxxxxx even wild roses xxx of a downtrodden land xxx reach enlightenment 
xxxxxx a chilly wind xxx a chilly autumn... xxx year of the dragon 
xxxxxx the laughter of a child xxx in the autumn xxx dusk 
xxxxxx i wish i had xxx my companion to nag... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx the only one to nag now xxx is the wall... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx no moon tomorrow xxx in this famous resort... xxx evening rain 
xxxxxx if only she were here xxx for nagging... xxx tonight's moon! 
xxxxxx on harvest moon night xxx rain gazing... xxx plume grass, maiden flowers 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx the famous mountain xxx just a fingertip 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx weakens the fan xxx weakens the hand 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx the former sumo wrestler xxx a begging priest 
xxxxxx through the sliding door's xxx knob hole... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx from the wild dog's xxx howling too, rising xxx mist 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx from the gables rising xxx mist 
xxxxxx tomorrow i might be xxx an ancestor at the altar... xxx bon festival 
xxxxxx horse-shaped melons xxx and ancestors xxx worshipped together 
xxxxxx to look at harvested xxx rice a sin... xxx visiting graves 
xxxxxx the old dog xxx leads the way... xxx visiting graves 
xxxxxx laughing politely xxx while tea is served... xxx buddha 
xxxxxx even the temple tea xxx makes her laugh... xxx little girl 
xxxxxx temple tea, xxx the cat is served xxx too 
xxxxxx looking on, holy jizo xxx lines up too... xxx dance for the dead 
xxxxxx on tanabata night xxx no one at home xxx in the hut 
xxxxxx tanabata night, xxx even in beggar-town xxx star-gazing boats 
xxxxxx even among the stars xxx lovers must part! xxx must part! 
xxxxxx celebration, xxx which stars are the children? xxx grandchildren? 
xxxxxx the young star xxx this year, once again xxx greets his wife 
xxxxxx if only she were here xxx for nagging... xxx mum festival sake 
xxxxxx sumo champion, xxx he won't even step xxx on a bug 
xxxxxx from the pines xxx frogs watch, too... xxx sumo match 
xxxxxx sumo match, xxx from trees the frogs, too xxx cheer 
xxxxxx it's my life's autumn xxx but the moon xxx looks flawless 
xxxxxx deep-mountain deer xxx also stray off the path xxx to love 
xxxxxx kasuga field, xxx with the god's permission xxx deer make love 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx with the founder's blessing xxx cats make love 
xxxxxx to left and right xxx dropping in a flash... xxx thousands of birds 
xxxxxx do you want to sing xxx in the lamp too? xxx blue insect 
xxxxxx have you come xxx to save us haiku poets? xxx red dragonfly 
xxxxxx continuing the song xxx of the katydid... xxx a baby cries 
xxxxxx roof of the house, xxx sown by the birds xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx for one chrysanthemum xxx a gold coin 
xxxxxx atop the big chrysanthemum xxx asleep... xxx caterpillar 
xxxxxx in my thatched hut xxx profit grows... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx neck and neck xxx with the mighty lord... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx morning-glories, xxx people's faces seem xxx thrown together 
xxxxxx bending back xxx to face the big rain... xxx maiden flower 
xxxxxx piss also xxx turns to pearls... xxx field of yams 
xxxxxx divine wind, xxx the rice in the field xxx five, six feet tall 
xxxxxx divine wind! xxx rice heads in the field xxx rustling 
xxxxxx red hot peppers xxx in the end, at last xxx turn blue 
xxxxxx mountain shade, xxx a secluded village's xxx hot peppers 
xxxxxx evening passes, xxx the house's post crackles xxx as cold enters 
xxxxxx a wind-chime's xxx empty babble ends xxx the year 
xxxxxx nothing to look xxx forward to, still... xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx she learns how to xxx boil water... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx even the sparrows xxx are quarreling, xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx big winter storms xxx little winter storms... xxx great lords, lesser lords 
xxxxxx a nail pounding xxx into sacred wood... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx busting up xxx the sparrow circle... xxx a winter storm 
xxxxxx priest doshin's xxx straw sandals pitter-patter... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx she learns how xxx to cook tofu... xxx night of winter rain 
xxxxxx a winter storm xxx overruns the man... xxx homeward bound 
xxxxxx a man emerges xxx from the roof of a boat... xxx a winter storm 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx on bean-parching day xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx the wedding singers xxx hit their peak... xxx night of winter rain 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx wrapping sardines xxx in oak leaves 
xxxxxx first snow falling xxx i trust in his hand... xxx bridge by the gate 
xxxxxx "first snowfall, blah-blah" xxx they stay indoors xxx the fools 
xxxxxx into the hot tub xxx the first snow xxx lightly flitting 
xxxxxx ramshackle hut, xxx on a snowy morning xxx lice-hunting 
xxxxxx a big snow, xxx the voices of people xxx trapped inside 
xxxxxx snowflakes flitting, xxx a splendid xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx falling snow, xxx the sound of snowshoes xxx chomp! chomp! 
xxxxxx snowed-in door, xxx "push to open!" xxx i yell from my bed 
xxxxxx snowy day, xxx now and then the fly xxx goes out to play 
xxxxxx to the rhythm xxx of snow sweeping xxx touring kyoto 
xxxxxx piling up xxx on the morning market's fire pan... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx frosty night, xxx scratching the window, crying xxx banished cat 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx while the gods are away xxx sleeping and carousing 
xxxxxx rice field to rice field xxx cutting straight through... xxx winter prayers 
xxxxxx at old basho's grave xxx the two of us... xxx first winter rain 
xxxxxx great edo, xxx even for the crossroads watchdog xxx god of wealth festival 
xxxxxx money god daikoku xxx sits alongside xxx the god of wealth 
xxxxxx from the shadow xxx of food offerings xxx the god of wealth peeks out 
xxxxxx after soot-sweeping xxx quickly they're lit... xxx red candles 
xxxxxx after the soot-sweeping xxx clamor... xxx the temple's red candles 
xxxxxx sweeping soot, xxx in the east a red xxx dawn sky 
xxxxxx the swept soot xxx has made it black... xxx tatami mat 
xxxxxx like everyone xxx in my hut, too, night work... xxx sweeping soot 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx in the beggar-town xxx gifts of new clothes 
xxxxxx from a little nook xxx the cat returns... xxx a gift of new clothes 
xxxxxx on the year's last night xxx a new face for the cat... xxx devil's mask 
xxxxxx mountain village, xxx a little girl, too xxx in a lady's cotton veil 
xxxxxx though in buddha's presence xxx just a simple cloth xxx skullcap 
xxxxxx trying on a skullcap xxx it doesn't hide... xxx my white hair 
xxxxxx sitting room, xxx a crow drops xxx a snowball 
xxxxxx with her hairpin xxx she blocks softly... xxx the snowball 
xxxxxx blocked with her xxx samisen's plectrum... xxx snowball 
xxxxxx jumping aside xxx the crow just laughs... xxx snowball 
xxxxxx turning 'round xxx it's a grown woman! xxx snowball 
xxxxxx a snowball hit! xxx holy jizo's xxx cheek 
xxxxxx eyeing the war lord xxx from my toasty warm xxx brazier 
xxxxxx a scops owl laughs too xxx at his wig... xxx mount kamiji 
xxxxxx snow country, xxx in the hearth's corner xxx a leek garden 
xxxxxx though in the latter days xxx wood becomes prayer beads... xxx domei temple 
xxxxxx a full round xxx of new year's greetings xxx at the inn 
xxxxxx maybe this quake xxx will put the world right... xxx year's first day 
xxxxxx first month, xxx the fool's half door xxx an eyesore 
xxxxxx land of the rising sun! xxx money makes money... xxx the emperor's spring 
xxxxxx in the clear blue sky xxx not a blemish... xxx prosperous spring 
xxxxxx spring beings, xxx a mountain of rice xxx from one pine 
xxxxxx toward the mouth xxx of the paper puppy too... xxx my new year's walk 
xxxxxx with wooden clogs xxx a walk through the field... xxx new year's pilgrimage 
xxxxxx sticking incense sticks xxx in the snow... xxx new year's lucky direction 
xxxxxx in shadows xxx a "happy new year!" xxx walking in straw sandals 
xxxxxx while taking xxx my morning piss... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx even for the dog xxx they toss a new year's gift... xxx temple 
xxxxxx leaving a new year's gift xxx for the fox god inari... xxx hole in the ground 
xxxxxx dropping off new year's gifts xxx as i go... xxx no one's home 
xxxxxx new year's gifts, xxx i toss one to the swindler xxx cat 
xxxxxx new year's present, xxx the nursing baby reaches xxx with little hands 
xxxxxx fool cat xxx on the new year's gift winnow xxx sound asleep 
xxxxxx making the rounds xxx as a new year's gift... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx old wall, xxx the new almanac xxx faces the brazier 
xxxxxx in the year's first dream xxx the cat also sees fuji... xxx i bet 
xxxxxx year's first dream, xxx mount fuji is sold xxx in kyoto 
xxxxxx little child xxx draws the year's first water... xxx again and again! 
xxxxxx the year's first water xxx looks wonderful! xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the year's first water xxx in an earthen teapot... xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx the red kite xxx in a drag-behind xxx kind of mood 
xxxxxx kites of edo xxx from morning on, heads xxx shaking, shaking 
xxxxxx an edo kite xxx joins the others... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx the pilgrim xxx while receiving alms xxx kite flying 
xxxxxx the feudal lords' xxx kasumi-ga-seki... xxx a kite 
xxxxxx the stepchild's kite, xxx various patches xxx appear 
xxxxxx two or three leaves xxx atop the tobacco... xxx herbs 
xxxxxx around three leaves xxx then calling it quits... xxx picking herbs 
xxxxxx from the short sword's xxx hilt dangling... xxx herbs 
xxxxxx a smattering of lanterns xxx here and there... xxx the year's first crow 
xxxxxx covered by the big snow xxx yet standing... xxx new year's flower 
xxxxxx in second month xxx the new year's grass xxx at last 
xxxxxx the great temple's xxx smoking ban... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx on a beggar's hut xxx riches fall... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx the daffodils xxx have become flowers! xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx three ride the same horse xxx home 
xxxxxx on one horse xxx three riders... xxx the spring breeze blows 
xxxxxx spring's first rainbow xxx from the wheat field on my left xxx to the western snowcaps 
xxxxxx a noon nap xxx on a good day... xxx first rainbow 
xxxxxx well-wishing at the gate, xxx the faces of hills and fields xxx laughing 
xxxxxx a crossroads temple, xxx one rice seedling xxx one vegetable 
xxxxxx peaceful sleep, xxx on the rice-seedling bed xxx the evening rain 
xxxxxx this world today, xxx migrating servants' teardrops xxx the rain 
xxxxxx a throng from echigo xxx singing songs, down the highway xxx they go 
xxxxxx a long procession, xxx migrating servants singing xxx on the main road 
xxxxxx even in a back-alley house xxx edo is edo... xxx the doll festival! 
xxxxxx the big cat sleeps xxx in the same seat... xxx with the doll 
xxxxxx wearing their lucky day xxx faces... xxx the dolls 
xxxxxx even the widow's doll xxx is served right away... xxx great edo 
xxxxxx a big house, xxx even for the dog xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx the dolls on the shelf xxx neighbors... xxx to my fart 
xxxxxx the old doll xxx in the junk store window xxx sunning herself 
xxxxxx herb cake, xxx while one hand xxx pets the dog 
xxxxxx the herb cakes xxx i put on holy jizo's lap xxx then eat 
xxxxxx herb cake, xxx squatting on the lawn xxx i join the dog 
xxxxxx swinging on the swing xxx clutching xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the world today, xxx even while gathering herbs xxx dressed to the nines 
xxxxxx the buddha's tea, too xxx fills one straw mat... xxx spread out 
xxxxxx chrysanthemum garden, xxx one chop of the hoe xxx five cups of sake 
xxxxxx plowing a slope xxx like a standing board... xxx mountain becomes farm 
xxxxxx with his hoe the farmer xxx shows the way... xxx temple pine 
xxxxxx with a just-yanked xxx radish xxx pointing the way 
xxxxxx farmers plowing, xxx lying down i watch xxx lord kaga pass 
xxxxxx lover cat, xxx he cocks his ears xxx then back to sleep 
xxxxxx take a peek xxx in hell's mirror! xxx lover cat 
xxxxxx hedge's plum tree, xxx the cat's prowling route xxx blooms shut 
xxxxxx his prowling route xxx over the flowers... xxx a japanese cat 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx brushing the dog's nose xxx passes by 
xxxxxx the lover cat xxx licking his chops xxx escapes 
xxxxxx the lover cat's xxx call is answered... xxx facing the river 
xxxxxx cats' love calls, xxx between them flows xxx sumida river 
xxxxxx cats yowling xxx separated by a wall, xxx tragic lovers 
xxxxxx all night long xxx the cat, too xxx a secret romeo 
xxxxxx a spitting image xxx of her mother... xxx kitten 
xxxxxx ten kittens xxx ten xxx different colors 
xxxxxx his fresh-shed antler xxx his pillow... xxx the sleeping buck 
xxxxxx on the shrine's altar xxx the buck offers xxx his antlers 
xxxxxx on buddha's mountain xxx he sheds them... xxx the buck's antlers 
xxxxxx i open my hut xxx for birds to make nests xxx while i'm gone 
xxxxxx unaware the tree xxx is destined for the axe... xxx nest building 
xxxxxx a bird making a nest xxx a temple being built... xxx when will they finish? 
xxxxxx bird's nest, xxx within arrow's reach xxx in the persimmon tree 
xxxxxx a bit of fair weather, xxx little birds call people xxx to yoshino 
xxxxxx a matter of taste, xxx the little bird calls xxx this old man 
xxxxxx even to the old man xxx "come!" cries xxx the baby bird 
xxxxxx the baby bird chirping xxx even to the old man xxx "come! come!" 
xxxxxx "come live, live xxx in the mountains!" xxx little birds call 
xxxxxx the rice pounder's mallet xxx is his pillow... xxx baby sparrows 
xxxxxx when you hold him kindly xxx he poops on you... xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx help yourself xxx to the rice in my lap xxx baby sparrow 
xxxxxx he prays to amida buddha xxx a baby sparrow xxx underfoot 
xxxxxx crying his cry xxx in vain... xxx the stepchild sparrow 
xxxxxx whatever the day brings xxx the nightingale's alone xxx i'm alone 
xxxxxx the nightingale presents xxx his apprentice... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx even the nightingale xxx has an apprentice... xxx sitting room 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even the rascally dog xxx howls for love 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx for the emperor too xxx the same song 
xxxxxx the nightingale sings xxx to his children xxx now and then 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx after him his apprentice xxx sings 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx in bamboo the sparrow sings xxx not conceding 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx the cat, tied up xxx is yowling 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx even his shit xxx gets wrapped in paper 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx raised in the mountains xxx but such a voice! 
xxxxxx the war lord's xxx nightingale xxx is an apprentice 
xxxxxx now they swoop xxx straight down... xxx mr. and mrs. swallow 
xxxxxx renting a place xxx next door to the chickens... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx he's the mouse's xxx bosom buddy... xxx a swallow 
xxxxxx renting the shop xxx they set up house... xxx mr. and mrs. swallow 
xxxxxx farewell! farewell! xxx to the chicken... xxx the skylark flies away 
xxxxxx a pheasant cries, xxx tucked alongside the thicket xxx a noodle shop 
xxxxxx on the sleeping cow's xxx belly... xxx a pheasant cries 
xxxxxx if you stay at my hut xxx you'll need to shut up! xxx night pheasant 
xxxxxx honking while they drink xxx edo's water... xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx drinking edo's water xxx at last... xxx returning geese 
xxxxxx morning rain, xxx geese, too, celebrate xxx their successful return 
xxxxxx scrawny goose, xxx honking at his friends xxx flying north 
xxxxxx from his hole xxx the snake pokes his head... xxx the cat slaps it 
xxxxxx big snake, xxx with trepidation coming out xxx his hole 
xxxxxx world of corruption, xxx sir snake slithers xxx from his hole 
xxxxxx a splendid world! xxx even the snake xxx leaves his hole 
xxxxxx human goblins, xxx leaving their holes xxx before the snakes 
xxxxxx iosaki, xxx on top of the eaves xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx being so fat xxx he's not a good jumper... xxx frog 
xxxxxx father frog xxx quickly takes the seat xxx of honor 
xxxxxx do you think my lap xxx is a hermit's? xxx frog jumps on 
xxxxxx bowing his head xxx in the scattering blossoms... xxx frog 
xxxxxx a frog squats xxx in his open palm... xxx a holy man 
xxxxxx with a face xxx like he's contemplating the stars... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx from the shrine's entrance gate xxx eyeing edo... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx eyeing the rice cake xxx on the banked fire... xxx crow 
xxxxxx in the field buddha's xxx stone hand, squatting xxx frog 
xxxxxx midday passes, xxx on holy jizo's lap xxx a croaking frog 
xxxxxx onto the butterbur leaf xxx landing upside-down... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx one by one xxx they take their croaking seats... xxx frogs 
xxxxxx yoshiwara, xxx passing time raising a ruckus xxx frogs 
xxxxxx lured by the butterfly xxx hairpin... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx young buck, xxx shaking off the butterfly xxx then back to sleep 
xxxxxx never growing old xxx mr. and mrs. xxx butterfly 
xxxxxx a body of dust xxx lighter than dust... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx blocking the bird catcher's xxx sticky pole... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx clinging to the wall xxx with relief, evening's xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx loads of butterflies xxx swarming it... xxx the dog's bowl 
xxxxxx at gate after gate xxx green hills xxx of silkworm poop 
xxxxxx at an honest man's gate xxx honeybees xxx make their home 
xxxxxx fleeing the bees xxx the monkey's restless xxx eyes 
xxxxxx leasing it xxx to the bees... xxx leaving my hut 
xxxxxx honeybees, xxx but right next door xxx hornets 
xxxxxx watching the hermit crab xxx stretching its neck? xxx bird with no nest 
xxxxxx discarding his house xxx a huge relief... xxx hermit crab 
xxxxxx "no cruel village xxx for me!" xxx mr. hermit crab 
xxxxxx a quick nap xxx for the clinging xxx hermit crab 
xxxxxx his quick nap xxx is just pretend... xxx hermit crab 
xxxxxx coloring the world xxx lushly, straggly xxx violets too 
xxxxxx breaking a plum branch xxx "i'm stealing it!" xxx he yells 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx dried sardines scattered xxx on the cat's grave 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx outside the outhouse xxx a sword bearer 
xxxxxx plum blossoms, xxx the child puts a coat xxx on her doll 
xxxxxx from the nape xxx of the field buddha's neck... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx the blossoming tree xxx born with such good xxx karma 
xxxxxx the blossoming tree xxx born to a friendly xxx existence 
xxxxxx on horseback he cuts xxx straight through... xxx blossom viewers 
xxxxxx edo voices, xxx the blossom viewing ends xxx in a quarrel 
xxxxxx the big cat hides xxx to piss... xxx snow on the blossoms 
xxxxxx in ceremonial robe xxx he's fallen down drunk... xxx blossom shade 
xxxxxx if only she were here xxx for nagging... xxx blossom viewing mat 
xxxxxx ten forecasters xxx all wrong... xxx rain on the blossoms 
xxxxxx the blossoms are thinking xxx of falling... xxx horse dung mound 
xxxxxx your name escapes me xxx old friend... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx cherry blossoms, xxx 'round a bend in the road xxx holy jizo stands 
xxxxxx even viewing the cherry blossoms xxx costs money... xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx sticking to xxx her stick of candy... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx divine wind, xxx even an evil place, less evil xxx mountain cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx little straw mat, xxx coins, a little butterfly xxx and fallen cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx the war lord xxx forced off his horse... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx bathed in the dust xxx of people's feet... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx at an inn called xxx mountain monkey... xxx cherry blossoms 
xxxxxx filling in xxx for temple flowers... xxx a willow 
xxxxxx trimmed and trimmed xxx again and again... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx from the cut branch xxx a leafy strand... xxx willow tree 
xxxxxx ridge between rice fields, xxx the horse eats xxx the sheltering willow 
xxxxxx floating it comes, xxx willow tree xxx at my gate 
xxxxxx on a hot day xxx summer's last "first thing"... xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx hot day, xxx the silkworms take a break xxx from their eating 
xxxxxx hot day, xxx a staring contest with xxx a gargoyle 
xxxxxx hot day, xxx from the fire lookout tower xxx someone's face 
xxxxxx a tall chrysanthemum xxx in the dead center xxx of the heat 
xxxxxx under a full moon xxx yet still not cool... xxx the straw mat 
xxxxxx in the cool air xxx wooden clogs clack... xxx zuigan temple 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx straight from the holy grove xxx it comes 
xxxxxx soaking feet xxx in the river at the gate... xxx summer rain 
xxxxxx hoe for a pillow xxx sickle for a pillow... xxx summer rain 
xxxxxx through a hole xxx you can see the ocean... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx on the mountain's peak xxx charcoal being made... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx a boat's sail xxx gradually takes shape... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx the beggar child xxx plucks and sings... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx the great eaves xxx of the temple's great gate... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx though overlooked xxx the rice field grows... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx at every gate xxx a celebration... xxx summer moon 
xxxxxx for the white storehouse xxx just a drop... xxx green rice field 
xxxxxx festival, xxx tiger lilies, princess lilies xxx hakata lilies 
xxxxxx though i can almost xxx step over it... xxx edo's mount fuji 
xxxxxx asakusa, xxx before my breakfast plate xxx pilgrims climb mount fuji 
xxxxxx in asakusa xxx a dog tags along... xxx mount fuji pilgrims 
xxxxxx a free cormorant xxx also comes to feast... xxx at the cage 
xxxxxx taking care to stretch it xxx over the head... xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx his father's xxx father's father wore it too... xxx summer robe 
xxxxxx the herb cake xxx is wonderful again! xxx new summer robe 
xxxxxx a wrinkled face xxx but a splendid new xxx summer robe! 
xxxxxx even for priests xxx and lay priests... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx the cat naps xxx in a lacquered tray... xxx summer room 
xxxxxx in the house xxx with no mosquito net xxx expert snoring 
xxxxxx in the house xxx with no mosquito net xxx noisy deep sleep 
xxxxxx one fly, two flies, xxx my sleeping mat's become xxx a place to see 
xxxxxx a sunshade xxx of broken branches... xxx siesta 
xxxxxx even in this far-off xxx mountain village... xxx paper fans from edo 
xxxxxx his paper fan xxx tucked behind... xxx old man style 
xxxxxx covering up xxx my water for tea... xxx my fan 
xxxxxx clack-clack his cane, xxx a paper fan xxx tucked behind 
xxxxxx the garden's bamboo, too xxx swish-swishing... xxx paper fan 
xxxxxx in the pauses xxx of our pillow talk xxx fanning 
xxxxxx airing out clothes, xxx the lined-up wooden clogs xxx of the buddhas 
xxxxxx dousing the nightingale xxx with water... xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx back in the house xxx cooling off again... xxx moon in the window 
xxxxxx father and son's xxx fart contest... xxx cool air at the gate 
xxxxxx making the mountain xxx hot spring husk the rice... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx rice-planting girl, xxx on her back a butterfly xxx sleeps 
xxxxxx like the bats xxx night's streetwalkers too xxx make their slow rounds 
xxxxxx the bats, too xxx live in a storehouse... xxx great edo! 
xxxxxx from the arms xxx of the deva kings xxx bats dangle 
xxxxxx straight for his head xxx heads xxx the bat 
xxxxxx a bat, xxx buzzing the ear xxx of the hooker 
xxxxxx a bat xxx from the nape of the streetwalker's xxx neck 
xxxxxx waking up xxx the whole neighborhood... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx the masses wait xxx but all in vain... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx don't come! don't come! xxx ugly cuckoo xxx ugly crow 
xxxxxx toribe field, xxx ugly cuckoo! xxx ugly crow! 
xxxxxx don't come! don't come! xxx ugly cuckoo xxx ugly crow 
xxxxxx the cuckoo serenades xxx all of edo xxx all...night...long! 
xxxxxx also waiting xxx for the cuckoo... xxx a fool 
xxxxxx all of them have left xxx the ugly cuckoos! xxx cuckoos! 
xxxxxx mountain crow xxx don't interrupt! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx hey, get up! xxx it's a cuckoo xxx cuckoo! 
xxxxxx in the middle of the night xxx an unwelcome song... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx admonishing xxx my heavy drinking... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx are you lecturing me xxx about my heavy drinking? xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx grandpa's teahouse, xxx to the right, to the left xxx mountain cuckoos 
xxxxxx you and i xxx a perfect pair... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx are we too xxx destined to die? xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx sticking to xxx the raftsman's rice... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx sprinkled on xxx the raftsman's rice... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx over the big house xxx an excellent flight! xxx firefly 
xxxxxx can't quite get over xxx the high rooftop... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx house in deep shade xxx at high noon... xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx mother monkey xxx baby on her back points... xxx fireflies! 
xxxxxx first firefly, xxx carelessly it leaves xxx kyoto 
xxxxxx the first firefly xxx flies smack into people's xxx heads 
xxxxxx leaving the town xxx breathing easier... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx shooing fireflies xxx from the rice tub... xxx night boat 
xxxxxx staying in the house xxx it bumped into... xxx big firefly 
xxxxxx don't go! don't go! xxx all their calls are lies xxx first firefly 
xxxxxx in cogon grass, xxx thin mosquito, thin flea xxx thin child 
xxxxxx edo's mosquitoes xxx so bold! xxx so bold! 
xxxxxx thrown together, xxx thin mosquitoes, thin fleas xxx thin children 
xxxxxx knees smelling of sake xxx taste just fine... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx driven from next door xxx here they come... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx driven from all quadrants xxx here they come... xxx mosquitoes 
xxxxxx from buddha's direction xxx a mosquito... xxx temple hall 
xxxxxx even the mosquito hates xxx thin legs... xxx quickly moving on 
xxxxxx the more i swat xxx the more they come... xxx flies on my lap 
xxxxxx the blind priest xxx with his red bowl... xxx shooing flies 
xxxxxx i go back in xxx my thatched hut... xxx the fly does the same 
xxxxxx the fly xxx left a little spot... xxx a letter 
xxxxxx the chicken's poor xxx at pecking them... xxx rice cake's flies 
xxxxxx the lacquered tray xxx is the fly's xxx outhouse 
xxxxxx "it's a good year!" xxx they clamor... xxx flies in the grass 
xxxxxx how industrious! xxx shooing the fly xxx off someone else's head 
xxxxxx coming back xxx inside my house... xxx the gate's flies 
xxxxxx monkey in the tree xxx discarding his fleas... xxx on the dog 
xxxxxx in the lap xxx of the holy man... xxx a cicada sings 
xxxxxx on the great goblin's xxx humongous nose xxx a snail 
xxxxxx under a dribbling tree xxx stretching her neck xxx a snail 
xxxxxx in this falling rain xxx where are you off to xxx snail? 
xxxxxx clinging to a leaf xxx of bamboo xxx a teeny-tiny snail 
xxxxxx closing the door xxx he drops off to sleep... xxx snail 
xxxxxx making the rounds xxx on the plaster wall... xxx snail 
xxxxxx emerging xxx from the little rice tub xxx a snail 
xxxxxx running with a barrel xxx on his head... xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx a big house, xxx even for the dog xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx shibaura, xxx summer's first bonito xxx then sunrise 
xxxxxx my portion xxx just a tiny slice... xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx in the silver dew xxx good luck dwells... xxx peony garden 
xxxxxx in the field xxx of towering wheat... xxx a peony 
xxxxxx looking out of place xxx at my thatched hut... xxx blooming peony 
xxxxxx not quite fitting in xxx my thatched hut... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx a hanging temple bell xxx a lantern... xxx and a peony 
xxxxxx my oh my xxx what a radiant face... xxx peony 
xxxxxx a perfect match xxx for the crazy cat... xxx peony 
xxxxxx wrapped in xxx a beggarly vine... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx "good luck's coming!" xxx the peony longs xxx to be heard 
xxxxxx a mountain temple, xxx clouds of red xxx peonies! 
xxxxxx farm field, xxx four or five rustling xxx lotus blossoms 
xxxxxx running messages, wagtail xxx for the shrine's god? xxx irises 
xxxxxx thatched roof, xxx the irises piercing it xxx bloom 
xxxxxx world of buddha's law! xxx the holy man's banana tree xxx has bloomed 
xxxxxx ripened barley, xxx walking through the field xxx a little sake vendor 
xxxxxx the barley's autumn xxx like real autumn... xxx cold drizzle 
xxxxxx a splendid, tall xxx young bamboo! xxx young bamboo! 
xxxxxx among the anthills xxx swish swish... xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx rustling, rustling xxx the field's bamboo too... xxx young and lively 
xxxxxx what a racket! xxx the gate's young bamboo xxx young sparrows 
xxxxxx what a racket! xxx even good-for-nothing bamboo xxx at the peak of youth 
xxxxxx becoming a walking stick xxx little bamboo xxx at the peak of youth 
xxxxxx growing toward my window xxx to cheer me up? xxx this year's bamboo 
xxxxxx living in harmony, xxx boy and girl bamboos xxx the peak of youth 
xxxxxx young bamboo xxx and old bamboo... xxx full of pluck 
xxxxxx bamboo shoots, xxx mingling with trees xxx they bend 
xxxxxx even the old tree xxx happy happy... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx the paulownia tree xxx serene and still... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx even the old wall xxx is frugal... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx round ones, square ones xxx the box tree's xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx the mountain temple xxx looks empty... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx under cover of darkness xxx sneaking in... xxx chilly autumn 
xxxxxx after struggling to reach xxx mount obasute... xxx rain-gazing 
xxxxxx harvest moon night xxx on mount obasute... xxx rain gazing 
xxxxxx a farting contest, xxx harvest moon night xxx in the hut 
xxxxxx house in the thicket, xxx my rice cake stuck to the pan xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx a green paper xxx mulberry leaf, offered xxx to the stars 
xxxxxx helping the child's hand xxx write it... xxx the "star poem" 
xxxxxx misayama, xxx today, all day xxx a famous resort! 
xxxxxx griping about xxx the war lord's fireworks... xxx mouths of edo 
xxxxxx pretending not to see xxx his wife's face... xxx defeated wrestler 
xxxxxx he makes a fine xxx wind-break... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx letting the wrestler xxx rub her hand... xxx a woman 
xxxxxx he's become xxx a sumo wrestler! xxx proud parents 
xxxxxx basking in the war lord's xxx good graces... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx to the loincloth xxx raising his sake... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx turning aside xxx to look at mount fuji... xxx sumo champion 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx even a good-for-nothing river xxx has a bird clapper 
xxxxxx evening rain, xxx my next door neighbor xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx a rainy evening, xxx my next-door neighbor xxx pounding cloth 
xxxxxx autumn departs xxx on a palanquin... xxx new sake in the shop 
xxxxxx how irritating! xxx the wild geese freely xxx call their friends 
xxxxxx migrating birds, xxx not one of them xxx lacks skill 
xxxxxx walking stick hole, xxx don't you like it, snake? xxx he doesn't enter 
xxxxxx snakes, xxx go home to the holes xxx of their birth 
xxxxxx such chatter! xxx even the field's insects xxx join in 
xxxxxx the eye pods xxx come off with a crackle... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the eye pods xxx come right off... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the eye pods xxx come right off... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the eye pods xxx come off with a crackle... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx to my humble hut xxx he comes fly-hunting... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx farm field, xxx here, there...and there xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx in cool morning-glories xxx eating my rice xxx alone 
xxxxxx autumn rice, xxx the green reflected xxx in thin ice 
xxxxxx until the trip to edo xxx again and again... xxx young tobacco 
xxxxxx deep mountains, xxx a child also gnaws xxx a hot pepper 
xxxxxx tiny little things, xxx look! xxx edo's hot peppers 
xxxxxx without fanfare xxx they have bloomed... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx it's no disgrace xxx to be long-blooming! xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx acorn, xxx rolling three times xxx then into the pond 
xxxxxx chestnuts falling, xxx all the chickens xxx squawking! 
xxxxxx this deep forest xxx is haunted! xxx tengu's mushrooms sprout 
xxxxxx tengu's mushrooms sprout, xxx the entrance xxx to a haunted place 
xxxxxx ramshackle hut, xxx adding to the cold xxx more cold 
xxxxxx thin wall, xxx with the moonlight comes xxx the cold 
xxxxxx thin wall, xxx from the mouse's hole xxx the cold 
xxxxxx the child finishes it xxx with his little box... xxx ice 
xxxxxx night of freeze, xxx on silk damask sits xxx my piss-pot 
xxxxxx under the ice xxx the cat's eyes follow... xxx crazy fish 
xxxxxx the packhorse crosses xxx tat-a-tat... xxx the ice 
xxxxxx main temple, xxx the copybook's paperweight xxx a shard of ice 
xxxxxx sacred monkeys xxx pick each other's fleas... xxx a spring day in winter 
xxxxxx a spring day in winter, xxx i go out for a walk xxx a fly comes along 
xxxxxx bedtime sake, xxx whether the new year comes xxx or not 
xxxxxx in a buddhist land too xxx prison inmates... xxx the year ends 
xxxxxx the year ending, xxx the old man feels somehow xxx abandoned 
xxxxxx seeing me home xxx to my hut... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx rear window, xxx every day, day, day xxx northerly winter rain 
xxxxxx big straw sandals xxx pitter-patter... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx priest doshin's xxx straw sandals pitter-patter... xxx steady winter rain 
xxxxxx again and again xxx the winter rain stopping xxx starting 
xxxxxx escorting the man xxx to the temple... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx seeing me home xxx to my hut... xxx the winter rain 
xxxxxx falling on my feet xxx as i sleep... xxx night's winter rain 
xxxxxx being weighed in the scales xxx for mountain brushwood... xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx cold winter sky, xxx where will this wandering beggar xxx grow old? 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx a crescendo of snores xxx in my trashy house 
xxxxxx in winter wind xxx the field watchman's snores xxx crescendo 
xxxxxx kindly the winter wind xxx sweeps xxx my gate 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx by the gate the nettle tree's xxx big biceps 
xxxxxx winter wind, xxx camellia blossoms have fixed xxx their make-up 
xxxxxx they curse the first snow xxx like it's a beggar... xxx rest stop 
xxxxxx watching first snow, xxx mending holes xxx in the paper door 
xxxxxx the first snowfall xxx doesn't hide it... xxx the dog's poop 
xxxxxx the backstreet xxx is the dog's toilet xxx first snowfall 
xxxxxx sheltered from wind xxx what a snow pile! xxx garden by the gate 
xxxxxx the worms in my belly xxx warn: xxx "snow tomorrow!" 
xxxxxx at my ramshackle hut xxx flying into fire... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx pelting people xxx on the highway... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx making people xxx on the highway scatter... xxx hailstones 
xxxxxx frosty night, xxx seven poor men xxx in a huddle 
xxxxxx at dawn people xxx passing through... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx a pheasant rising xxx startles the man... xxx withered fields 
xxxxxx voices in the wind xxx the withered field's xxx crows 
xxxxxx don't miss my gate xxx please! xxx good luck god 
xxxxxx trying to do my laundry xxx while the gods are away... xxx another day of rain 
xxxxxx world of suffering, xxx when the gods travel, too xxx a storm 
xxxxxx well, well xxx coming home in the rain... xxx god of the poor 
xxxxxx don't forget xxx your pink-cheeked wife! xxx departing god 
xxxxxx crows line up xxx after their baths... xxx welcoming the gods 
xxxxxx after winter prayers xxx right away... xxx a trip to yoshiwara 
xxxxxx ten nights of xxx winter prayers, ten nights xxx of moon 
xxxxxx world of buddha's law, xxx even a dog on winter xxx pilgrimage 
xxxxxx behold these traveler's xxx wrinkles... xxx basho buddha! 
xxxxxx my home village, xxx four or five years of soot xxx needs sweeping 
xxxxxx after the soot-sweeping xxx clamor... xxx the temple's red candles 
xxxxxx after soot-sweeping xxx quickly they're lit... xxx red candles 
xxxxxx sweeping soot, xxx in the high priest's chamber xxx a lonely cauldron 
xxxxxx downwind xxx from the horse's fart... xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx playing with the dog xxx at the gate... xxx little twelfth month singer 
xxxxxx a child buddha xxx pointing... xxx twelfth month singers 
xxxxxx twelfth month singers xxx at the temple's great gate... xxx moon at dusk 
xxxxxx just a single helping xxx of rice cake is pounded... xxx a commotion! 
xxxxxx the sound of rice cake xxx pounding drifts here... xxx distant neighbor 
xxxxxx making just one xxx round rice cake... xxx a commotion! 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx even for the piss-pot xxx a gift of new clothes 
xxxxxx feather-light xxx made of paper... xxx gift of new clothes 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx every day, drinking xxx the year away 
xxxxxx living alone, xxx just one bottle xxx for drinking away the year 
xxxxxx our great age! xxx in every little town xxx year's end fairs 
xxxxxx showing off xxx my leather coat... xxx year's end fair 
xxxxxx bundling it up xxx with an old charm... xxx last year's calendar 
xxxxxx the mountain hermit xxx calls it medicine... xxx last year's calendar 
xxxxxx i've counted xxx my trouble-free days... xxx last year's calendar 
xxxxxx growing a year older xxx in japan xxx is a comfort 
xxxxxx a present from xxx amida buddha... xxx one year older 
xxxxxx asakusa, xxx visiting the temple xxx driving out a devil 
xxxxxx the devil driven xxx from a horse... xxx ise shrine pilgrimage 
xxxxxx four-way crossroads, xxx one drives out devils xxx one takes them in 
xxxxxx old bird, xxx even before the hunt begins xxx accepting the inevitable 
xxxxxx heading for where xxx bird hunters are few... xxx the fox 
xxxxxx bird hunter, xxx even for a fox xxx no mercy 
xxxxxx bird hunter, xxx even before his falcon xxx a weary sleep 
xxxxxx the crow laughs xxx at the bird hunters... xxx temple roof 
xxxxxx up to now xxx how many days of thirst? xxx hunted bird 
xxxxxx a fugitive in the temple xxx caught alive... xxx pheasant 
xxxxxx fleeing bird, xxx every direction it turns xxx people's voices 
xxxxxx fleeing bird xxx watch out, that way's xxx a pit trap! 
xxxxxx laboring hard xxx the bird pens his prey... xxx foxhole 
xxxxxx now the only vigorous thing xxx is his mouth... xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx the wastepaper patch xxx for the burn hold tickles... xxx paper robe 
xxxxxx at my gate xxx the snow buddha also xxx scowls 
xxxxxx an unruly horse xxx behind the house... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx the cricket also xxx moves in with me... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx one more day xxx of winter seclusion... xxx makes two 
xxxxxx buddha in his niche xxx in the pillar... xxx winter seclusion 
xxxxxx we tell stories xxx of the far mountains xxx 'round the brazier 
xxxxxx natto, xxx for a full portion xxx traveling far 
xxxxxx the souvenir straw wrapper xxx smolders too... xxx my natto 
xxxxxx wrapped in straw, xxx country natto xxx country chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx calling people xxx for the pufferfish soup... xxx highway 
xxxxxx "come and get it!" xxx boiled pufferfish xxx at a sumida river inn 
xxxxxx every evening xxx my sleep medicine... xxx pufferfish soup 
xxxxxx making a face xxx he turns down the boar stew... xxx teaching the children 
xxxxxx making a face xxx he turns down the pufferfish soup... xxx teaching the children 
xxxxxx the shop front's xxx scops owl xxx fidgeting, fidgeting 
xxxxxx scops owl, xxx sleeping so well xxx atop the pole 
xxxxxx iosaki, xxx in a kettle a plover xxx singing 
xxxxxx an uproar on the beach, xxx children xxx and plovers 
xxxxxx with made-to-order xxx motley coloring... xxx the radish 
xxxxxx even for washing xxx four or five radishes... xxx hired help 
xxxxxx gnawing a radish xxx till it's gone... xxx the old man 
xxxxxx at picking time xxx not left out...the thicket's xxx radishes 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx the glint of leeks xxx in the sink 
xxxxxx scratching the field buddha's xxx head too... xxx tree leaves 
xxxxxx winter withering, xxx on the willow's gnarl xxx straw sandals for sale 
xxxxxx new year's day, xxx my hut's front door xxx all ready 
xxxxxx new year's day, xxx in the dark before dawn xxx the lover cat 
xxxxxx on new year's morning xxx the prayers to buddha xxx come and go 
xxxxxx i struggled though xxx my new year's day... xxx like everyone 
xxxxxx on one side xxx of my paper lantern... xxx first of spring 
xxxxxx at zenko temple xxx praising buddha to the beat... xxx spring begins 
xxxxxx an old man's world, xxx flowers of snow on bare trees xxx spring's blossoms 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx feudal lords too xxx on spring journeys 
xxxxxx a bit of gambling xxx to ward off mosquitoes this year... xxx spring in the village 
xxxxxx new year's shelf, xxx even in this dump xxx etiquette 
xxxxxx servants' holiday, xxx fellow travelers part ways xxx combing the hair 
xxxxxx ramshackle hut, xxx my new year's decorations xxx on crooked 
xxxxxx blown away as usual xxx my house's xxx new year's rope 
xxxxxx the first month xxx has me hooked on it... xxx lucky tea 
xxxxxx from outside xxx plum blossoms diving in... xxx lucky tea 
xxxxxx facing the mountain xxx of my home village... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx the uproar in the servants' room xxx wins out... xxx new year's toasts 
xxxxxx tight-fisted donors xxx rolling along... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx on both sides xxx while they and i piddle... xxx "happy new year!" 
xxxxxx starting the new year's luck xxx first stoke xxx of the fire 
xxxxxx from the short sword's xxx hilt dingle-dangling xxx herbs 
xxxxxx country of gods! xxx on new year's day grasses xxx suddenly bloom 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx my tears of joy xxx rolling down 
xxxxxx when even bathing xxx becomes a chore... xxx a long day 
xxxxxx a long day, xxx even getting in the bath xxx is a chore 
xxxxxx the long xxx stretched-out spring finally... xxx over 
xxxxxx "it's theater day!" xxx my wife goes out... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring rain, xxx to help the digestion xxx a hot bath 
xxxxxx a day for wandering xxx a day for haiku... xxx spring rain 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx even a child has a winnow xxx two winnows! 
xxxxxx heat shimmers, xxx an avalanche xxx on firewood mountain! 
xxxxxx on a lucky day xxx the snow on the old head xxx has melted! 
xxxxxx the pecking chicken xxx makes it melt... xxx snow at the gate 
xxxxxx rearranged xxx by the wind... xxx spring equinox snow 
xxxxxx picking herbs, xxx mother from her palanquin xxx watches 
xxxxxx teasing a butterfly xxx with his tail... xxx the kitten 
xxxxxx baby sparrows xxx by the cow and the horse xxx untrampled 
xxxxxx baby sparrow xxx without being stomped xxx by horses nor cows 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx half of the house is still xxx moonlit 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx the sparrow pecking xxx the rice for the god 
xxxxxx nightingale, xxx the bell rings, he sings xxx the bell rings, he sings 
xxxxxx when he sings he sings xxx the lotus sutra... xxx gambling at the crossroads 
xxxxxx stone still xxx for the smelling horse... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx down he sits xxx with a great thump... xxx frog 
xxxxxx on top of a stake xxx eyeing edo... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx eyeing the rice cake xxx on the banked fire... xxx crow 
xxxxxx hanging from the yellow rose xxx with one hand... xxx a frog! 
xxxxxx a previous life's bond? xxx little butterfly xxx on my sleeve, asleep 
xxxxxx in tree shade xxx relaxing with a butterfly... xxx friends in a previous life 
xxxxxx tickling the baby xxx in the basket awake... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx baby in a basket, xxx playing with her snot xxx a little butterfly 
xxxxxx skillfully skirting xxx the hot tub waterfall... xxx little butterfly 
xxxxxx recklessly stomping xxx the baby grass... xxx muddy straw sandals 
xxxxxx the young grasses xxx after all xxx are, well, young! 
xxxxxx new green grass xxx makes a perfect circle... xxx facing the temple hall 
xxxxxx just as wonderful xxx as the expensive garden stone... xxx azaleas 
xxxxxx walking along xxx sweeping shells... xxx plum blossom village 
xxxxxx with a plain, light-blue xxx skullcap... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx plain, light-blue xxx skullcaps... xxx sprinkled in 
xxxxxx cherry trees blooming, xxx this corrupt world xxx is a pure land! 
xxxxxx in the blooming tree xxx a sleeping chicken... xxx senso temple 
xxxxxx if someone came xxx i'd have a companion... xxx blossoming mountain 
xxxxxx toward the mouth xxx shouting "there! there!" xxx cherry blossoms fall 
xxxxxx mountain goblins xxx are out in droves... xxx cherry blossoms! 
xxxxxx the dog at the gate xxx barks for fun... xxx at peach blossoms 
xxxxxx the horse stands xxx rubbing his rump... xxx peach blossoms 
xxxxxx short summer night, xxx in the field turtles xxx cavort 
xxxxxx though night is short xxx too long! too long! xxx for me 
xxxxxx even on a hot day xxx out for the children... xxx swallows 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even in my soup bowl xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx even in my soup xxx mount fuji! 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx a green hanging bell xxx red blossoms 
xxxxxx cool air, xxx paper snowflakes fluttering xxx down 
xxxxxx the hanging temple bell xxx is all green... xxx cool air 
xxxxxx pretty, xxx not a cloud in the xxx midsummer sky 
xxxxxx for a sincere land xxx even in the next life... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx wetting this old man's xxx sleeve too... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx the village of human goblins xxx isn't left out... xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx not falling xxx on the insincere village? xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx land of the rising sun! xxx old as heaven and earth xxx rain of the tiger 
xxxxxx though in the latter days xxx the land of the gods! xxx tiger rain 
xxxxxx all puffed up xxx today the cloudburst xxx comes again 
xxxxxx origins, xxx mount tsukuba's cloudburst xxx becomes mount fuji's 
xxxxxx with a cloudburst xxx kneaded in completely... xxx the field 
xxxxxx a rainstorm, xxx kisa lagoon's farmland xxx and kanman temple 
xxxxxx in the cloudburst xxx chin up, back straight... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx a naked rider xxx on a naked horse 
xxxxxx rainstorm, xxx the shrine in the thicket's xxx twelve lamps 
xxxxxx the buddha, xxx on his birthday a shower xxx of coins 
xxxxxx buddha pretends xxx to be born... xxx bells and big drums 
xxxxxx the buddha xxx immersed in coins celebrates xxx his birthday 
xxxxxx summer seclusion, xxx every night the toad xxx comes calling 
xxxxxx others might think xxx i'm at my summer calligraphy... xxx little window 
xxxxxx about ten times through xxx for the foundling... xxx purification hoop 
xxxxxx on the little plague god xxx floating away... xxx lice 
xxxxxx "farewell! farewell!" xxx the plague god floats away... xxx little child 
xxxxxx night fishing, xxx the ones that get away xxx all runts 
xxxxxx at long last xxx the cloudburst! xxx the big drum booms 
xxxxxx in straw raincoats xxx for the summer shower... xxx drinking party 
xxxxxx the swallow xxx wide-mouthed chatters... xxx new summer robes 
xxxxxx how delightful, xxx my damp, sweaty xxx traveler's bathrobe 
xxxxxx the pony's eyes xxx look afraid... xxx parasols 
xxxxxx in wooden clogs xxx crossing a narrow rope... xxx with parasol 
xxxxxx a beggar goes first xxx praising buddha... xxx with parasol 
xxxxxx white umbrella-hats xxx pale blue parasols... xxx higashi mountains 
xxxxxx on the cooked rice-tub xxx the bamboo blind is green... xxx trashy house 
xxxxxx ryogaku bridge, xxx a little boat with green xxx bamboo blinds 
xxxxxx in evening's mosquito net xxx rustling xxx wildflowers 
xxxxxx on the fan's handle xxx the baby sucks... xxx a substitute 
xxxxxx wind-making goblin xxx where are you fanning xxx your fan? 
xxxxxx the child on her back xxx cries to the beat... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx even a little child xxx comes out of the house... xxx rice planters' lunch 
xxxxxx the wisteria too xxx blooming en masse... xxx rice-planting song 
xxxxxx making a waterfall xxx under the eaves... xxx sweet jelly 
xxxxxx a bat flits xxx under my sleeve... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx generations of bats xxx have called this storehouse xxx home 
xxxxxx bats keep the pilgrims xxx company... xxx buddha of healing 
xxxxxx flood waters, xxx bats dangle xxx from the crossing-rope 
xxxxxx i entrust my home xxx for the night xxx to mosquito-eating bats 
xxxxxx great edo xxx from nook to nook xxx "cuckoo!" 
xxxxxx a big leap, xxx the fleeing burglar xxx and a cuckoo 
xxxxxx having a flying contest xxx a night burglar xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx waking the farmer xxx from his siesta... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx while the canoe goes xxx swish, swish, swish... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx the goblins are gone xxx so get to work! xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx having a jumping contest xxx a night burglar xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx a big leap, xxx the fleeing burglar xxx and a cuckoo 
xxxxxx just one song xxx then turning a cold shoulder... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx a cuckoo sings xxx the little boat goes xxx swish, swish! 
xxxxxx turning a cold shoulder xxx to the one who waited... xxx cuckoo 
xxxxxx pecking rice xxx on the shrine's fence... xxx mountain cuckoo 
xxxxxx the village hits xxx a crescendo of snores... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx "the dog took your lunch!" xxx the reed thrush xxx tattles 
xxxxxx working at night xxx under the full moon... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx night work singing xxx under the full moon... xxx reed thrush 
xxxxxx no wife and kids xxx waiting for you? xxx lingering duck 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx even a snake's skin xxx for sale 
xxxxxx sleeping in the house xxx it bumped into... xxx big firefly 
xxxxxx escaping the fight outside xxx my hut's xxx fireflies 
xxxxxx one more xxx cross the river! xxx fireflies flit 
xxxxxx after the bath xxx tickling my armpit... xxx firefly 
xxxxxx eat and run, the wisdom xxx of mosquitoes and fleas... xxx wisdom buddha's temple 
xxxxxx on the high priest's xxx head... xxx flies making love 
xxxxxx the bell of life passing, xxx o flies and worms xxx listen well! 
xxxxxx since i'm decrepit xxx the fleas aren't worried xxx about escaping 
xxxxxx since i'm old xxx the fleas aren't worried xxx about escaping 
xxxxxx burning fleas xxx to predict the weather... xxx mountain home 
xxxxxx good moon, xxx but going inside xxx a hell of fleas 
xxxxxx tone river, xxx only one solitary xxx water strider 
xxxxxx cicadas chirr, xxx the blind priest's fan xxx his umbrella-hat 
xxxxxx so teeny-tiny xxx peacefully resting xxx snail 
xxxxxx bamboo leaf, xxx he takes his little portion xxx the snail 
xxxxxx great edo, xxx even for the dog xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx a whole bonito fish xxx for the shotgun house xxx an uproar! 
xxxxxx to my humble hut xxx they come to gawk... xxx summer's first bonito 
xxxxxx carrying a poppy xxx he passes through xxx the quarrel 
xxxxxx a money-making xxx temple... xxx the peonies in bloom 
xxxxxx the temple favors xxx the chinese style... xxx with its peonies 
xxxxxx stuck in a hole xxx in a stone signpost... xxx a peony 
xxxxxx a masterly climb xxx to the top of the peony... xxx frog 
xxxxxx the swallow wipes xxx his muddy mouth... xxx on the peony 
xxxxxx day after day xxx bathing in wheat chaff... xxx the peony 
xxxxxx rice chaff, xxx the path through xxx the peony garden 
xxxxxx mountain clouds, xxx that red one is a field xxx of peonies! 
xxxxxx barley husking, xxx in the middle of a highway xxx a tea kettle 
xxxxxx barley husking, xxx a paper lantern xxx in the gate's nettle tree 
xxxxxx thatched roof, xxx how many ears of barley xxx did birds bring? 
xxxxxx thatched roof, xxx the bird has added xxx an ear of barley 
xxxxxx children hiccup xxx in the shade... xxx fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx a noble effort, xxx the scraggly hedge too xxx has fresh green leaves 
xxxxxx hearing voices xxx the leech drops... xxx summer trees 
xxxxxx back window, xxx just one tree xxx for deep tree shade 
xxxxxx a flower big xxx as an umbrella-hat... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx the shinto priest's xxx festival for one... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx wildflowers blooming xxx pure white... xxx deep tree shade 
xxxxxx deutzia blossom hedge xxx the dog's xxx maternity room 
xxxxxx deutzia blossoms, xxx the children visit xxx the frog's grave 
xxxxxx a sight to see! xxx from a hole in the wall xxx autumn moon 
xxxxxx hole in the old wall xxx a famous resort... xxx autumn moon 
xxxxxx through the wall's hole xxx the harvest moon... xxx sleep time's pleasure 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx through the wall's hole... xxx a late riser 
xxxxxx "praise! praise!" xxx in harvest moonlight xxx a child prays 
xxxxxx one harvest moon xxx special-delivered... xxx little room 
xxxxxx starvation gives way xxx to rice cakes! xxx ninth month moon 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx issa's heart and mind xxx stirring 
xxxxxx autumn wind, xxx it's from the buddha's xxx western paradise! 
xxxxxx my home village xxx can't see it now... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx eating my rice xxx in solitude... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx a bell is clanging xxx nonstop... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx incense smoke xxx on the buddha in the field... xxx morning dew 
xxxxxx on the straw sandals xxx of a visitor... xxx the gate's dewdrops 
xxxxxx lightning flash, xxx lying in a row, faces xxx of sixty year-olds 
xxxxxx the evening teahouse xxx by the river is closing... xxx little lightning 
xxxxxx on leaves of bamboo xxx lightning xxx flickers, flickers 
xxxxxx across the dried river xxx the bolt of lightning xxx flickers 
xxxxxx at my house xxx morning mist, noon mist xxx evening mist 
xxxxxx the darling child xxx summons his mother xxx crawling, laughing 
xxxxxx the orphan child xxx summons his mother xxx clapping 
xxxxxx the ancestors come xxx and inspect it... xxx rice field by the gate 
xxxxxx child in my arms, xxx "mama's coming!" xxx he hits the prayer gong 
xxxxxx on the ancestors' altar xxx flopping down to sleep... xxx thieving cat 
xxxxxx an orphan led xxx by hand... xxx a lantern for the grave 
xxxxxx that dancer's voice, xxx just like mother's xxx like mother's! 
xxxxxx cool night, xxx which stars are the children? xxx the great-great-grandchildren? 
xxxxxx beaming smiles xxx in the best of moods... xxx two stars 
xxxxxx from time immemorial xxx bride star! xxx groom star! 
xxxxxx even one-penny xxx fireworks... xxx ooo! ahh! 
xxxxxx even for me, xxx fabulously expensive xxx fireworks! 
xxxxxx stooping xxx to enter his house... xxx sumo wrestler 
xxxxxx the sumo wrestler xxx apologizing, releases xxx the sparrow 
xxxxxx the wrestler's defeat xxx spreads a thousand miles xxx quickly 
xxxxxx temple mountain, xxx the dog also barks xxx at a scarecrow 
xxxxxx nagging, nagging, xxx the new sake xxx is drained 
xxxxxx the young buck kneels xxx on one knee... xxx moon gazing 
xxxxxx the sacred deer xxx stand still xxx to be petted 
xxxxxx on a large beach xxx early risers for breakfast... xxx snipe 
xxxxxx geese at my gate, xxx when i return xxx how they glare! 
xxxxxx wild geese clamoring xxx and one pretentious xxx crow 
xxxxxx geese and ducks xxx honking, quacking away... xxx the horse 
xxxxxx making themselves at home xxx asleep, awake... xxx geese at my gate 
xxxxxx even the stag beetle xxx calls for a wife... xxx night voices 
xxxxxx grassy meadow, xxx insects crowd 'round xxx the paper lantern 
xxxxxx he's utterly given up xxx silent xxx insect 
xxxxxx grumbling, xxx the insects outside xxx the house in the trees 
xxxxxx the insects outside xxx are grumbling too... xxx house in the trees 
xxxxxx don't cry, insects! xxx the world will get better xxx in its own time 
xxxxxx though a weak insect xxx he holds his own... xxx that voice! 
xxxxxx against the black fence xxx trying to hide... xxx dragonfly 
xxxxxx the dragonfly's xxx steady glare... xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx a cricket xxx tickling my face xxx passes by 
xxxxxx trampled to pieces xxx by the crickets... xxx my eaves 
xxxxxx in the dried river xxx swimming splendidly... xxx locust 
xxxxxx in the flood xxx trusting divine protection... xxx locust 
xxxxxx in the flood xxx its karma is strong... xxx flying locust 
xxxxxx even at the peak xxx of my hut's grass roof... xxx a locust 
xxxxxx the leftovers xxx caught by the cat, people eat... xxx locusts 
xxxxxx biting the hand xxx that sets it free... xxx katydid 
xxxxxx village child, xxx accompanies the earthworms' song xxx with flute 
xxxxxx that voice xxx he's a young one... xxx earthworm 
xxxxxx the earthworms' song xxx grows thinner... xxx night by night 
xxxxxx the ocean, xxx coming for sardines xxx even the dog 
xxxxxx the farm field's layout, xxx here and there xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx farm field, xxx here, there...and there! xxx chrysanthemums 
xxxxxx perfectly straight xxx if we let it be... xxx chrysanthemum 
xxxxxx about as good xxx as the morning-glories... xxx temple bell 
xxxxxx morning-glory, xxx a poor vine accompanies it xxx creeping along 
xxxxxx dawn, xxx the windblown, exhausted xxx maiden flowers 
xxxxxx maiden flowers, xxx after one windy night xxx fallen 
xxxxxx an unexpected xxx country teahouse... xxx blooming bush clover 
xxxxxx the young buck xxx with a load on his back... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx into the sunken hearth xxx they're swept... xxx red leaves 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx all the buildings strewn xxx with red leaves 
xxxxxx the paulownia leaf xxx his fly-guard... xxx he sleeps 
xxxxxx the old priest xxx fans himself... xxx paulownia leaf 
xxxxxx heading for where xxx quince is scarce... xxx rose of sharon 
xxxxxx crumbled house, xxx the glorious roses xxx of sharon 
xxxxxx encircling the house xxx that emits no smoke... xxx roses of sharon 
xxxxxx this side trimmed xxx that side resentful... xxx hedge of roses 
xxxxxx the crows join xxx the children... xxx gathering chestnuts 
xxxxxx makes no difference to me, xxx the year ends xxx or doesn't end 
xxxxxx so pretty, xxx as the year finally ends xxx evening's sky 
xxxxxx two winter storms xxx come one after the other... xxx field by the gate 
xxxxxx "first snowfall!" xxx they rise and sing... xxx worms in my gut 
xxxxxx a teeny-tiny bit, xxx even heaven's snow xxx in short supply 
xxxxxx pissing xxx with the neighbor... xxx evening snow 
xxxxxx on a half-snow xxx half-mud road... xxx slogging along 
xxxxxx on a snowy day xxx the temple is packed... xxx pigeons, sparrows 
xxxxxx the hut's dog is escort xxx to the winter xxx prayers 
xxxxxx "it's basho's death-day!" xxx he says xxx to himself 
xxxxxx walking into sunset xxx on basho's death-day... xxx straw sandals 
xxxxxx basho's death-day, xxx from noon on, open house xxx at the hut 
xxxxxx sneezing i take xxx another sake break... xxx sweeping soot 
xxxxxx in a package from edo xxx new clothes...and i'm not xxx his dad! 
xxxxxx beautiful courtesan, xxx new clothes for her hometown's xxx buddha 
xxxxxx the dog xxx braces himself... xxx snowball! 
xxxxxx the do-gooder reluctantly xxx begins... xxx his winter seclusion 
xxxxxx pufferfish soup, xxx all the houses xxx snoring together 
xxxxxx house of reeds xxx where plovers sleep xxx plastered with crap 
xxxxxx beach plovers xxx raise a ruckus... xxx the dog runs away 
xxxxxx entering kyoto too xxx a bunch of sour-faced xxx pufferfish! 
xxxxxx with a radish xxx driving off a deer... xxx his field 
xxxxxx the little imp xxx totes one too... xxx radishes 
xxxxxx so that the nightingale xxx can make a living xxx fallen leaves 
xxxxxx frost-killed grass, xxx the poor town stretches xxx foolishly long 
xxxxxx musashi plain, xxx in its standing water xxx mount fuji 
xxxxxx spring breeze, xxx across the field a parade xxx of light blue parasols 
xxxxxx timing his death xxx extremely well... xxx the buddha 
xxxxxx observing well xxx this world of blossoms... xxx buddha dies 
xxxxxx a nightingale sings, xxx the empty palace xxx his field 
xxxxxx the baby swallow's xxx flying lesson... xxx off the horse's rump 
xxxxxx taming the flesh xxx he moves through thorns... xxx a frog 
xxxxxx hot tub steam xxx wafts softly, softly... xxx as does a butterfly 
xxxxxx some of them stick xxx to people, young grasses xxx at their peak 
xxxxxx cherry blossom shade, xxx no sleeping for me xxx feeling afraid 
xxxxxx today no blossom viewing xxx for me... xxx feeling afraid 
xxxxxx the world today! xxx umbrella-hatted princes and paupers xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx thatched house, xxx everything drenched xxx by the autumn rain 
xxxxxx imitating xxx the menacing dog... xxx blossom viewing 
xxxxxx mountain temple, xxx below where i sprawl xxx clouds of blossoms 
xxxxxx the price of grain xxx falls bitterly... xxx the heat 
xxxxxx garden at the gate, xxx a tailor-made xxx little cloudburst 
xxxxxx through a hole xxx you can see the lake... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx making mountains rise xxx in the clouds... xxx cawing crow 
xxxxxx burning trash xxx in a field... xxx billowing clouds 
xxxxxx less high xxx than the sins of men... xxx peak of a cloud 
xxxxxx lacking the good sense xxx to form billows... xxx rushing clouds 
xxxxxx cleaning the well, xxx on a stone a bottle xxx of sacred sake 
xxxxxx even cool air basking xxx not worth the bother... xxx moon at the gate 
xxxxxx safe and sound xxx in the healing hot spring xxx my arm's flea 
xxxxxx let's go then xxx into the autumn evening xxx for our farewells 
xxxxxx in my sake cup xxx down the hatch! xxx the milky way 
xxxxxx old wall, xxx from whichever hole xxx autumn moon 
xxxxxx for the children xxx rice cakes while they gaze... xxx almost harvest moon 
xxxxxx secluded house, xxx in the mood tonight xxx to moon-gaze 
xxxxxx harvest moon, xxx even crabs claim xxx the name "taira!" 
xxxxxx pretending to watch xxx the harvest moon... xxx rice field-gazing 
xxxxxx river by the gate, xxx thrown in a corner xxx the ninth month moon 
xxxxxx dewdrops forming, xxx when might i become xxx grass...or a tree? 
xxxxxx by bon lantern light xxx eating my rice... xxx naked 
xxxxxx tanabata night, xxx the well-behaved children xxx of beggar-town 
xxxxxx looks like he's composing xxx a "star poem"... xxx the frog 
xxxxxx remote village, xxx among the grave lanterns xxx a katydid 
xxxxxx the puppy walks by xxx with a hat... xxx fallen leaf 
xxxxxx snow flitting down, xxx the mountains of shinano xxx aren't joking 
xxxxxx my beloved cherry tree xxx cooked too... xxx making charcoal 
xxxxxx in a cloud of smoke xxx the cherry tree becomes xxx charcoal 
xxxxxx new year's day, xxx all of us in a corrupt world's xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx on new year's day xxx everywhere, a corrupt world's xxx blossoms 
xxxxxx even the cart man xxx wears a courtier's hat... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx flowing water spells xxx the character "heart"... xxx plum blossoms 
xxxxxx at the dinner xxx tray's edge... xxx a green rice field 
xxxxxx he circles his rice field xxx an open fan tucked xxx behind 
xxxxxx stuttering about xxx the olden days... xxx a cuckoo 
xxxxxx behind the morning-glories xxx a hell xxx of fleas 
xxxxxx let it be xxx let it be! the flea xxx has children 
xxxxxx sweeping fleas xxx onto the highway... xxx moonlit night 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx in a little stone field xxx catching fleas 
xxxxxx world of man, xxx even walking on sand xxx picking up fleas 
xxxxxx on burnt ground xxx the fleas throw a wild xxx party 
xxxxxx after the fire, xxx the fleas throw a wild xxx party 
xxxxxx moon in the autumn dawn, xxx nearing month's end xxx lantern in the eaves 
xxxxxx my home village xxx at the end of that cloud... xxx autumn dusk 
xxxxxx at the shrine xxx children sumo wrestlers... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx pipe smoke blowing xxx it tastes like tobacco... xxx autumn wind 
xxxxxx on green reeds xxx in a row... xxx bon festival buddhas 
xxxxxx bonfires for the dead, xxx soon they'll burn xxx for us 
xxxxxx fires for the dead, xxx soon we all go xxx that way 
xxxxxx dawn of the month's xxx last day... xxx for bon lanterns in the eaves 
xxxxxx one dies out xxx two die out... xxx lanterns for the dead 
xxxxxx after tanabata night's xxx coolness xxx a hot tub soak 
xxxxxx the pony stepping xxx and crunching... xxx chestnuts in the field 
xxxxxx knocking chestnuts xxx out of the little garden... xxx thief cat! 
xxxxxx he's also in no mood xxx to sweep the snow... xxx scarecrow 
xxxxxx even to the approaching dog xxx "who's there?" xxx winter quilt 
xxxxxx spindrift . . . xxx i go where xxx the story takes me 
xxxxxx drifting snowflakes xxx the police cars ascent xxx up our driveway 
xxxxxx evening breeze xxx through the barnboards xxx final bid 
xxxxxx our easy silence xxx every puddle xxx sky-deep 
xxxxxx wedding invitations xxx the press and release xxx of the nib 
xxxxxx paddling through stars xxx the wake of a boat xxx long passed 
xxxxxx pride parade xxx from behind a cloud xxx the sun comes out 
xxxxxx stone cairns xxx a faded cap drifts xxx downriver 
xxxxxx jasmine beyond xxx the honeycombed lattice xxx a call to prayer 
xxxxxx sand dunes xxx by morning xxx a different dream 
xxxxxx early morning xxx mist reunites xxx the hills 
xxxxxx the underside of leaves xxx her back story xxx changes everything 
xxxxxx snow crocus xxx my grandson asks xxx if i have dreams 
xxxxxx county fair xxx second place ribbon xxx in an empty stall 
xxxxxx junk car xxx the hum of bees xxx beneath the hood 
xxxxxx the christmas xxx after we told them xxx artificial tree 
xxxxxx a bit of rust xxx on the chevy's fender xxx harvest moon 
xxxxxx forest clearing xxx a scapula xxx left for the moon 
xxxxxx that time of year xxx moonlight fills xxx his empty chair 
xxxxxx birding . . . xxx the unfamiliar path xxx home 
xxxxxx winter solstice xxx the tilt xxx of her hospital bed 
xxxxxx first morning xxx firecracker papers xxx wander the streets 
xxxxxx flies wait it out xxx under a cows chin xxx spring shower 
xxxxxx heartwood xxx the saw changes xxx its tune 
xxxxxx snow field xxx the earth marked xxx by fallen angels 
xxxxxx setting sun xxx an accordion squeezes xxx the night air 
xxxxxx no moon xxx the click of stilettos xxx on cobblestones 
xxxxxx flowing estuary xxx native languages xxx long gone 
xxxxxx in the hot tub xxx my eyes on her floating breasts xxx hunters moon 
xxxxxx rosebud unfolding xxx the seed packet left behind xxx in revelations 
xxxxxx no escaping xxx this moonlight xxx pompeii 
xxxxxx river mud xxx the shape xxx of boys 
xxxxxx desert twilight xxx a map with many creases xxx nailed to a cross 
xxxxxx we huddle xxx over mothers open grave xxx lawless winter 
xxxxxx a long bus ride xxx the prophetic language xxx of the stops 
xxxxxx navajo moon xxx the coyote call xxx not a coyote 
xxxxxx deleting words xxx from the eulogy xxx falling leaves 
xxxxxx calla lily xxx the sound of a ladder xxx lengthening 
xxxxxx tasting the well xxx in the water xxx summer stars 
xxxxxx mothers day xxx the expiration date xxx on wildflower seeds 
xxxxxx northern lights . . . xxx the scratchy play xxx of seventy-eights 
xxxxxx the big dipper xxx no matter where i stand xxx mountain sky 
xxxxxx summer passing xxx the yard flamingos xxx rusty legs  
xxxxxx glint of sunlight: xxx the respirator carries on xxx alone 
xxxxxx all souls day... xxx my name called xxx from the front gate 
xxxxxx autumn xxx an empty booster seat xxx in the barber's window 
xxxxxx hunter's cabin: xxx of the woods xxx not of it 
xxxxxx end of the walk xxx returning the crow's feather xxx where i found it 
xxxxxx cafe for sale xxx outdoor tables rusting xxx into autumn 
xxxxxx day lilies xxx another death date added xxx to the family tree 
xxxxxx the house finch xxx has a song for it, xxx morning after snow 
xxxxxx crescent moon xxx a bone carver sings xxx to his ancestor 
xxxxxx close enough to touch xxx i let the junco lead me xxx away from its nest 
xxxxxx blowing leaves xxx tempt the old cat, xxx but not enough 
xxxxxx ancient mountains . . . xxx runners clearing hurdles xxx on the practice field 
xxxxxx thanksgiving xxx fifteen minutes xxx of mince pie 
xxxxxx blossoms . . . xxx the babys bare feet xxx pedal the air 
xxxxxx butterfly xxx my attention xxx attention span 
xxxxxx one moth xxx a thousand candles xxx light the darkness 
xxxxxx trails end xxx my pebble xxx settles the cairn 
xxxxxx family reunion xxx some of the beached kelp xxx in knots 
xxxxxx a jar of pennies xxx on the lemonade stand xxx evening cool 
xxxxxx lightning . . . xxx the scarecrow's coat sleeve xxx caught in mid-wave 
xxxxxx summer's end xxx the hammock turned in xxx on itself 
xxxxxx charcoal alley xxx children flick marbles xxx into the light 
xxxxxx season of lights xxx the postman xxx leans to the wind 
xxxxxx having no thought xxx we've come to see them xxx dogwoods in bloom 
xxxxxx turning tide xxx placing intact clams xxx back in the water 
xxxxxx mallard pair xxx he rocks xxx on her wake 
xxxxxx filtering in xxx with the night air xxx a skunk's warning 
xxxxxx stone in my pocket xxx the brook cuts deeper xxx into the mountain 
xxxxxx a bee chose xxx the rose i meant to pluck . . . xxx empty vase 
xxxxxx soba noodles . . . xxx the new year xxx slips in 
xxxxxx hazy dusk . . . xxx no one bothered to plow xxx the graveyard road 
xxxxxx child's wake xxx the weight xxx of rain 
xxxxxx a stick caught xxx on the lip of the dam xxx winter's end 
xxxxxx summer stars . . . xxx the old violin goes xxx to the highest bidder 
xxxxxx winter drags on . . . xxx i squeeze the last drops xxx from a teabag 
xxxxxx distant thunder xxx a titmouse gives one chirp xxx and falls silent 
xxxxxx alzheimer's birthday xxx each slice of the cake xxx takes part of her name 
xxxxxx march winds xxx a decade has passed xxx by your grave 
xxxxxx indian summer xxx a spent salmon xxx washes ashore 
xxxxxx after the funeral xxx whiskers still xxx in his razor 
xxxxxx the page-finders xxx of my fathers daily missal xxx losing their colors 
xxxxxx first buds of spring xxx i change the washers setting xxx to delicate 
xxxxxx among the gravestones xxx with names worn away xxx children play hide n seek 
xxxxxx whalebone xxx from a beach near savoonga xxx winter rain 
xxxxxx all saints morning xxx a path xxx of trodden leaves 
xxxxxx cremated xxx in her favorite kimono xxx small green plums 
xxxxxx spring rain xxx the gravedigger latches the door xxx of his backhoe 
xxxxxx loon calls xxx my daughter drawing circles xxx near the fire 
xxxxxx summer evening xxx from across the meadow xxx a call to supper 
xxxxxx shivering on the roof xxx i rub my palms together xxx meteor shower 
xxxxxx ocean breeze xxx a strand of seaweed xxx steadies the kite 
xxxxxx autumn rose xxx even as i sketch the wind xxx more petals fall 
xxxxxx humid july xxx from the stove the smell xxx of old fires 
xxxxxx the wind of autumn xxx a homeless man warms himself xxx hand to mouth 
xxxxxx broken easel xxx the front yard blue xxx with wildflowers 
xxxxxx heat waves xxx the hitchhiker shifts her child xxx to the other hip 
xxxxxx land's end xxx sand in each bite xxx of my apple 
xxxxxx indian summer xxx a fish slips through xxx the gill net 
xxxxxx spring sunshine xxx the climbing ivy xxx filled with sparrows 
xxxxxx meteor shower xxx a gentle wave xxx wets our sandals 
xxxxxx mountain hike xxx we drink from the beginning xxx of a great river 
xxxxxx spring sun xxx high in his arms xxx the newborn is shown 
xxxxxx snail xxx to know xxx its heart beats too 
xxxxxx lethal injection xxx unable to shut xxx the blind dog's eyes 
xxxxxx end of summer xxx the shape of his feet xxx in his sneakers 
xxxxxx geronimo's grave xxx someone has left xxx plastic flowers 
xxxxxx new in town xxx the scent xxx of unknown flowers 
xxxxxx foghorns . . . xxx we lower a kayak xxx into the sound 
xxxxxx catalog time xxx the garden begins xxx without a seed 
xxxxxx new butterfly . . . xxx folded wings xxx lean into the wind 
xxxxxx morning overcast xxx a few seeds still dangle xxx from the dandelion 
xxxxxx break up xxx i leave behind xxx her butterfly net 
xxxxxx walking home barefoot, xxx we enter the shadow xxx of the hill 
xxxxxx autumn evening . . . xxx a page of the old book xxx separates from the spine 
xxxxxx funeral procession . . . xxx snowflakes blowing xxx into the headlights 
xxxxxx autumn evening xxx my hospital window xxx becomes a mirror 
xxxxxx storm clouds xxx the cry of a shearwater xxx circles the sky 
xxxxxx late into the night xxx we talk of revelations xxx moon through the pines 
xxxxxx the kettle whistles . . . xxx a blur of garden color xxx on the window 
xxxxxx winter beach xxx a piece of driftwood xxx charred at one end 
xxxxxx riveredge old growth: xxx a towering window xxx of stars 
xxxxxx over the railroad tracks xxx the slow motion xxx of a snake 
xxxxxx the beetle i righted xxx flies straight into xxx a cobweb 
xxxxxx leaf in my palm xxx its stem extends xxx my lifeline 
xxxxxx about the tree xxx over my small son's grave xxx tell me 
xxxxxx musty smell xxx forgotten . . . deep xxx into the text 
xxxxxx that venus! xxx leading the cupped moon xxx through every turn of the road 
xxxxxx "grabs" and "opens" xxx the fist xxx sowing seeds 
xxxxxx the river xxx coming to it with nothing xxx in my hands 
xxxxxx deep silence xxx the orphaned nestlings xxx this third morning 
xxxxxx summer solstice xxx the long tips of lavender xxx bent by bees 
xxxxxx snowbound xxx coloring inside xxx the lines 
xxxxxx the dumproad pond xxx tadpoles exit xxx a birdhouse 
xxxxxx still sun-warmed . . . xxx the pulled-out scarecrow xxx in my arms 
xxxxxx changing the swallowtail xxx changed by it xxx the spring wind 
xxxxxx letting the branch go xxx a shower of petals falls xxx on the old woman 
xxxxxx toll booth lit for christmas xxx from my hand to hers xxx warm change 
xxxxxx winter seclusion xxx tending all day xxx the small fire 
xxxxxx on the path xxx only one of us xxx touched by a falling leaf 
xxxxxx winter, bedtime xxx static flickers xxx through a white sleeve 
xxxxxx warm river xxx up to our necks xxx in sunset 
xxxxxx beneath the ice xxx the waterfall xxx still falling 
xxxxxx old garden chair xxx sagging with the weight xxx of a single leaf. 
xxxxxx after the stroke. . . xxx watching only the half of your face xxx that smiles 
xxxxxx city window xxx mountains and pines xxx etched in frost 
xxxxxx autumn deepens xxx an empty snail shell xxx explored by an ant 
xxxxxx early morning sun xxx scattered on the table xxx several grains of salt 
xxxxxx snowflakes xxx no one will miss xxx melt in her hand 
xxxxxx bright leaves xxx blow through xxx her dream house 
xxxxxx scattering his ashes xxx the moon xxx in bits and pieces 
xxxxxx on the river xxx of many names, one cloud xxx floating 
xxxxxx learning too late xxx he didn't like bubinga wood xxx sun strikes the urn 
xxxxxx the war memorial xxx migrating butterflies xxx cover the names 
xxxxxx falling leaves xxx the house comes xxx out of the wood 
xxxxxx leaving you xxx fog on either side xxx of the white heron 
xxxxxx below zero xxx all curled up in the woodpile xxx the skin of a snake 
xxxxxx deep winter. xxx the armload of firewood xxx chills the kitchen 
xxxxxx mourning dove calls . . . xxx my elderly neighbor stills xxx the sound of her hoeing 
xxxxxx august morning xxx a window washer wiping dust xxx from his sunglasses 
xxxxxx snowmelt . . . xxx she enters xxx the earth on her knees 
xxxxxx an old woolen sweater xxx taken yarn by yarn xxx from the snowbank 
xxxxxx a white horse xxx drinks from the acequia xxx blossoming locust 
xxxxxx sunlight shines red xxx through my father's thumb xxx on the steering wheel 
xxxxxx two women crying xxx one giving birth xxx the other being born 
xxxxxx approaching the family plot . . . xxx my furled umbrella xxx turns into a cane. 
xxxxxx chernobyl victim xxx fingers pressing the plastic xxx to his wife's caress 
xxxxxx cloud shadow xxx long enough to close xxx the poppies 
xxxxxx the thick clang xxx of a cowbell xxx the sun deepens 
xxxxxx roses xxx in the smaller room xxx more fragrant 
xxxxxx ninety winters xxx spellbound xxx again 
xxxxxx silent cathedral xxx stained-glass apostles xxx dimming with dusk 
xxxxxx up the path xxx to touch that one oak xxx in last night's dream 
xxxxxx dry leaves xxx the old archer xxx curves his eyebrow 
xxxxxx soft rain xxx the new grave xxx looks old 
xxxxxx morning sneeze xxx the guitar in the corner xxx resonates 
xxxxxx dusk xxx a lone car going the same way xxx as the river 
xxxxxx first days of summer . . . xxx already the leaves gather xxx beneath the sycamores 
xxxxxx so many ways xxx within the waterfall xxx for water to fall 
xxxxxx after the rain xxx on my vegetable patch xxx a new crop of stones 
xxxxxx frozen in mud xxx by the vacant shanty: xxx lottery ticket 
xxxxxx the potter's hands xxx gently shape the vase xxx out of himself 
xxxxxx watermelon rind, xxx sitting in its own juice xxx the summer sun 
xxxxxx figure drawing class xxx in the model's deepest shadows xxx a stark white string 
xxxxxx ebb tide . . . xxx a little sea xxx in the shell 
xxxxxx watching rain xxx pouring down . . . pouring down xxx just watching 
xxxxxx abandoned store xxx large sign reading xxx we never close 
xxxxxx a single strand xxx of spider silk xxx stops her 
xxxxxx mime xxx lifting xxx fog 
xxxxxx taking time . . . xxx listening xxx to the grocery clerk 
xxxxxx in the yukon xxx sleeping with one eye shut xxx the summer night 
xxxxxx in soap bubbles xxx again and again xxx his face is broken 
xxxxxx yard sale, xxx sunlight filling xxx mason jars 
xxxxxx leaving home . . . xxx the smell of smoke xxx from old brick chimneys 
xxxxxx frozen pond xxx white antlers rise xxx through the ice 
xxxxxx june night xxx my mother alone with xxx her cancer 
xxxxxx at dinner xxx biting into the roast beef . . . xxx the butcher's thumb nail 
xxxxxx phoning the neighbors xxx their real voices xxx through the open window 
xxxxxx repeating the lecture xxx his eyes following xxx the window-cleaner's blade 
xxxxxx tools rusting xxx unused on the work bench xxx a faucet dripping 
xxxxxx dusk xxx drawing the pond's depth xxx to the surface 
xxxxxx old woman, wrapping xxx her cat's gifts xxx centering the bows 
xxxxxx on the way to work xxx a hot air balloon xxx up in the mist 
xxxxxx this heat; xxx the dog's tail xxx the only breeze 
xxxxxx light xxx up under the gull's wing: xxx sunrise 
xxxxxx second husband xxx painting the fence xxx the same green 
xxxxxx such coolness xxx the snail stretches xxx its neck 
xxxxxx the one legged bird xxx that deep bend before xxx taking off 
xxxxxx bird song xxx lost xxx in bird song 
xxxxxx walking in on her xxx dead eyes reflecting xxx snowfall 
xxxxxx in the sea xxx the fireworks xxx rising 
xxxxxx circling each thigh xxx cool xxx of the night river 
xxxxxx small child xxx afraid to throw away xxx his church bulletin 
xxxxxx in utter stillness xxx the incense xxx changes direction 
xxxxxx early spring sun xxx the spinster combs out her hair xxx for nesting birds 
xxxxxx canyon: xxx at the very edge xxx riversound 
xxxxxx out of its slipper xxx her bare foot talking xxx under the table 
xxxxxx burial prayers xxx grandson playing hide and seek xxx behind the stones 
xxxxxx my father's hammer xxx warm again xxx in my hand 
xxxxxx under trees and sky xxx the baby studies xxx her hands 
xxxxxx migrating geese xxx once there was so much xxx to say 
xxxxxx sound of her voice xxx carrying eggs xxx across the ice 
xxxxxx moving xxx with the clock tower's shadow xxx the flower lady 
xxxxxx heart drawn in dust xxx by the old indian . . . xxx rain 
xxxxxx whispered dusk xxx a fox picks its way xxx across the ice 
xxxxxx mist xxx lifting xxx the loon's cry 
xxxxxx snowman's eye xxx sinking in xxx the spring rain 
xxxxxx autumn afternoon: xxx i stand on the shadow xxx of the sparrow 
xxxxxx ten below zero: xxx man and boy walk through their breath xxx to read old tombstones 
xxxxxx hot wind xxx the roadrunner's beak xxx opens and closes 
xxxxxx blackbirds descend xxx through the floaters xxx in this eye 
xxxxxx the old man xxx closes the shadow xxx in his hand 
xxxxxx spring drizzle xxx rounding the thorn xxx a drop of light 
xxxxxx horizon xxx wild swan drifting through xxx the woman's body 
xxxxxx deserted wharf xxx the mime bows xxx to the moon 
xxxxxx a spider's web xxx across the windharp xxx the silence 
xxxxxx under the back steps xxx catfish still flop in the pail xxx the long august night 
xxxxxx horns fold xxx at my shadow's touch; xxx brown slug 
xxxxxx early april rain xxx that woman fills every jar, xxx seals them forever 
xxxxxx dead mynah bird . . . xxx with each passing car xxx its wing flaps 
xxxxxx picking cotton xxx the memory xxx of birdtracks in the snow 
xxxxxx old tea bag; xxx tints the moon xxx slightly 
xxxxxx blackened walnut xxx left unopened xxx winter solstice 
xxxxxx distant woodchopper xxx inside the cabin xxx axbite echoes 
xxxxxx the grey cranes at dusk xxx bending in a line along xxx the crooked fenceposts 
xxxxxx checking for water xxx the woman finds a full moon xxx trapped in the cistern 
xxxxxx old woman, xxx rain in the eye xxx of her needle 
xxxxxx the path shorter now, xxx underfoot the crumbling leaves; xxx the child runs ahead 
xxxxxx fields of snow xxx not only moonlight xxx but the moon 
xxxxxx cold morning sea xxx an old man towels xxx himself in the sunlight 
xxxxxx fields of corn stretching xxx as far as the eye can see xxx within            a lost child 
xxxxxx crossing the bright sky xxx of a near-sighted swimmer, xxx the song of a bird 
xxxxxx and yet xxx perishable is flesh xxx a mountain plum 
xxxxxx what thing cries out xxx deep inside us xxx cooking the turtle? 
xxxxxx lights out xxx . . . the firefly xxx inside 
xxxxxx the wind xxx somewhere else xxx bird tracks in a light snow 
xxxxxx apples cooking: xxx in the aroma xxx pictures of my mother canning 
xxxxxx dawn xxx another parting xxx with the moon 
xxxxxx the child xxx points at the moon xxx and says, "bird" 
xxxxxx one seagull xxx on a shaft of air; xxx dawn 
xxxxxx lean man xxx carving xxx the tree's dream. 
xxxxxx from behind me xxx the shadow of the ticket-taker xxx comes down the aisle 
xxxxxx part of a dog xxx walking by upside down xxx in the roadside puddle 
xxxxxx where the ripple was xxx the fisherman casts his line; xxx another ripple 
xxxxxx quiet strokes xxx of night swimmer: the slap xxx of beaver tails . . . 
xxxxxx never expecting xxx the lilies in november xxx nor the small coffin 
xxxxxx the room's smallness xxx fills with light xxx this morning of snow 
xxxxxx the way of the conch xxx blueing in the sea, and xxx echoing in the wind 
xxxxxx old frog xxx up to his ears xxx in moonlight 
xxxxxx reaching into sky xxx the girl breaks the wish xxx bone of geese 
xxxxxx in a dark bag xxx onions xxx sprouting 
xxxxxx still lake xxx a hawk makes off xxx with its image 
xxxxxx skiers! xxx standing xxx on the wind 
xxxxxx    xxx home | what's new | about the hsa | how to join | society meetings | frogpond | newsletter xxx annual contests | haiku collections | hsa anthology | news | links | contact us 
xxxxxx distant singing xxx the winter stars xxx almost touch 
xxxxxx distant singing xxx the winter stars xxx almost touch 
xxxxxx after sunset . . . xxx the shapes xxx of the clouds 
xxxxxx circle of pines xxx god absent xxx from the wedding vows 
xxxxxx spring rain xxx milk in her left breast xxx unexpectedly sweeter 
xxxxxx spring evening xxx the children's promise xxx not to get cold 
xxxxxx autumn morning xxx repainting our bedroom xxx the color it was 
xxxxxx jackknifed rig xxx the trooper waves us xxx into wildflowers 
xxxxxx the numbness xxx of scar tissue xxx forsythia 
xxxxxx autumn wind xxx in his sweater pocket xxx the missing button 
xxxxxx squash vines xxx long and hollow xxx the last late evenings 
xxxxxx dim light xxx the night nurse xxx describes the rain 
xxxxxx late summer xxx black men spreading tar xxx on the side road 
xxxxxx knowing your cough xxx but not your face xxx invalid neighbor 
xxxxxx spring plowing xxx a flock of blackbirds xxx turns inside out 
xxxxxx squash vines xxx long and hollow xxx the last late evenings 
xxxxxx dusk xxx up to my ears xxx in birdsong 
xxxxxx all around xxx light falling in a field xxx of fireflies 
xxxxxx independence day xxx i let him touch xxx a little bit of me 
xxxxxx summer evening xxx fanning myself xxx with a paper moon 
xxxxxx close lightning xxx the metallic taste xxx in my mouth 
xxxxxx garden work xxx talking to each other xxx back to back 
xxxxxx dry heat xxx to the same withered flower xxx a bee returns 
xxxxxx starry night xxx biting into a melon xxx full of seeds 
xxxxxx i brush xxx my mothers hair xxx the sparks 
xxxxxx snowflakes glued xxx to the kindergarten window xxx no two alike 
xxxxxx undefended: xxx in the cold rain xxx their snow fort 
xxxxxx faint city stars  xxx the moths copper dust xxx in my palm 
xxxxxx fathers funeral xxx mother xxx suddenly small 
xxxxxx porch swing xxx now and then     a breeze xxx from the river 
xxxxxx january thaw xxx the narrow path xxx fading away 
xxxxxx spring planting xxx her refusal xxx to compromise 
xxxxxx logging road xxx the pileated woodpecker xxx flings its cry ahead 
xxxxxx ill again xxx a dry leaf xxx across porch boards 
xxxxxx leaving the park xxx glimpses of cherry petals xxx on the soles of shoes 
xxxxxx lily pond xxx with one step the snowy egret xxx moves the moon 
xxxxxx the white v of a killdeers wings xxx opening in the wake xxx of its cry 
xxxxxx snow xxx softening xxx the night 
xxxxxx a pile of rocks xxx shifting in spring rain xxx the stiff old man 
xxxxxx getting louder xxx the calf xxx the auctioneer 
xxxxxx bird shadow xxx from tree shadow xxx to fence shadow 
xxxxxx the petals scatter xxx over graves swept xxx and unswept 
xxxxxx a single leaf falling xxx and with it xxx the morning dew 
xxxxxx mountain rose xxx from thorn to thorn xxx a spiders line 
xxxxxx coming out of the woods xxx the sound of crickets, xxx the empty sky 
xxxxxx an old woman with bread xxx waves the geese down xxx from the sky. 
xxxxxx over the earths edge xxx they all gothe white clouds xxx and the one sailboat 
xxxxxx long beards longer xxx black clothes darker xxx under july sun 
xxxxxx amish gentleman's xxx warm smile brief . . . xxx my skirt long and plain 
xxxxxx an amish grin xxx as he cycles past xxx the station selling gas 
xxxxxx the gloom within xxx a handcrafts store . . . xxx dolls with missing faces 
xxxxxx facing mirrors xxx long-skirted woman xxx and her amish child 
xxxxxx music on the wind xxx an amish foot softly taps xxx and abruptly stops 
xxxxxx late night camp . . . xxx now a gentle lullaby xxx horse hooves heading home 
xxxxxx falling leaves xxx day by day xxx the house grows brighter 
xxxxxx darkening path xxx the white morning glories xxx lead the way 
xxxxxx in a backyard xxx two women folding sunlight xxx into sheets 
xxxxxx late autumn xxx the billboard's shadow leans xxx into the woods 
xxxxxx from the stream xxx two mallards fly straight up xxx through falling leaves 
xxxxxx new year's eve blizzard xxx a neon beer-sign glows xxx behind the steamed window 
xxxxxx spring breeze xxx the woods road is still wet xxx under the pines 
xxxxxx the old watering can xxx hangs one more rainbow xxx among the roses 
xxxxxx the evening paper xxx on the darkening lawn xxx first star 
xxxxxx the blues singer xxx tells how bad it is xxx then the sax tells you too 
xxxxxx quiet afternoon xxx in the meadow, one daisy xxx leans on another 
xxxxxx crossing the tracks xxx at twilight xxx the autumn wind 
xxxxxx chilly sunrise xxx a strip of bark flutters xxx on the lake-side birch 
xxxxxx twiddling my thumbs xxx the sun goes down, xxx the moon comes up 
xxxxxx winter drizzle xxx unloading a crate of live ducks xxx behind the chinatown restaurant 
xxxxxx snow melts by the hardware counter xxx the squares of color xxx in the paint catalog 
xxxxxx in the mirrors on her dress xxx little pieces of my xxx self 
xxxxxx a few blocks xxx from the street festival xxx the evening quiet 
xxxxxx at the pow-wow xxx they pass out ordinary saltines xxx for the ceremony 
xxxxxx while his passengers sleep, xxx the bus driver watches dawn xxx break 
xxxxxx by the lawn's edge, xxx the dog barks at the darkness xxx then looks back at me 
xxxxxx dead end xxx a few leaves circle xxx in the headlights 
xxxxxx late at night xxx a woman alone in the restaurant xxx addressing christmas cards 
xxxxxx snowy morning xxx the barber appears xxx in his mirrors 
xxxxxx moonrise xxx the columbine still xxx swinging 
xxxxxx changing pitchers xxx the base-runner looks up xxx at a passing cloud 
xxxxxx in the subway xxx the young conductor cues xxx imaginary oboes 
xxxxxx climbing the stairs xxx more slowly xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx the frozen puddle xxx kids slide over a pattern xxx of red leaves 
xxxxxx snow drifts xxx above the bear's den xxx starry night 
xxxxxx up in the sky xxx hardly heard, hardly seen: xxx migrating birds 
xxxxxx first spring day xxx melting and melting and melting xxx tracks of the mountain man. 
xxxxxx after heavy rain xxx the moon appears, bright, xxx over the marsh 
xxxxxx night storm  xxx a deeper dark unrolls xxx across the prairie 
xxxxxx woman touches a name xxx while looking at xxx an old photo 
xxxxxx elderly couple xxx their faces reflected xxx over their son's name 
xxxxxx man in a filthy army jacket xxx tries to scratch on xxx his name 
xxxxxx a candle xxx left burning on the ground xxx its flame almost out 
xxxxxx anzio beach  xxx another wave gathers xxx and breaks 
xxxxxx on razor wire xxx squats a crow xxx winter night 
xxxxxx black-uniformed winter fly xxx greeting me xxx behind bullet-proof glass 
xxxxxx walls of ice xxx deep in forests xxx frozen frogponds 
xxxxxx my silver shackles xxx gossamer threads xxx under these stars 
xxxxxx old guard escorting me xxx coughing like bullfrog xxx cigarette smoke for breath 
xxxxxx beating time with nightstick, xxx cricket sound xxx while i urinate 
xxxxxx oh, winter moon, xxx what have you done now xxx keep-locked with the mountains? 
xxxxxx decorating my cell again xxx i notice roommate xxx a silverfish on my pillow 
xxxxxx from out of hendersons haiku, xxx my old wifes photograph: xxx cells doors automatically locking. 
xxxxxx soothing rain: xxx the mown meadow releases xxx pungence of mint 
xxxxxx small water snake  consider the form     the beauty xxx a xxx the carrot peel     its curl   e 
xxxxxx a cloud in the cups tealeaves xxx e xxx sealed and cool     jars of blackberries     and blue   a 
xxxxxx butterfly shadows  xxx not finding xxx the butterfly 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: xxx bird nest in the mail box xxx also deserted 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: xxx wallpaper peeling back to xxx my childhood 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: xxx something scratching xxx inside the furnace 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: xxx the quiet bedroom where i xxx feared the dark 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: a xxx yellowed grocery list taped xxx to the counter top 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: a xxx moth flies out of the water xxx faucet 
xxxxxx abandoned farmhouse: xxx my daughter xxx snaps pictures of our visit 
xxxxxx into old pots and pans xxx thrown out in the backyard xxx the musical rain 
xxxxxx here & there xxx in bare treetops xxx mistletoe 
xxxxxx in a shabby motel xxx all night xxx treefrogs in rain 
xxxxxx cottonmouths xxx in the swamp ... xxx a house on stilts 
xxxxxx family get-together xxx all the eyes all the feelers xxx all the hands tearing shrimp 
xxxxxx morning in the french quarter xxx caf au lait & xxx beignets      with sparrows 
xxxxxx the river wind blows xxx into the quarter xxx & through his saxophone 
xxxxxx on the riverfront xxx a stranger xxx takes my smile 
xxxxxx the breeze xxx off the mississippi xxx fills my skirt 
xxxxxx behind grillwork xxx down darkness to sun xxx in a hidden courtyard 
xxxxxx cool the alley xxx through the grillwork swirls xxx cat pee smell 
xxxxxx in the morning shops xxx half the doorways xxx fill with shade 
xxxxxx all the mardi gras colors xxx in the masks xxx in the houses 
xxxxxx on the iron lace balconies xxx only flowers xxx sunning 
xxxxxx from the suite dusk xxx fills in the river xxx & all the tiny lights are slow 
xxxxxx huge limbs of the live oak xxx their reaching out xxx over the young grass 
xxxxxx in a pecan grove xxx wandering spring shadows xxx cows & blackbirds 
xxxxxx the slow day ... xxx in the empty motel corridor xxx a stack of dirty dishes 
xxxxxx sundown in the empty bar xxx the player-piano keys xxx begin 
xxxxxx the big waitress departs xxx the china teapot xxx shakes 
xxxxxx january sun ... xxx the cotton fields xxx dotted with leftovers 
xxxxxx longest night xxx his forehead burning xxx into my hand 
xxxxxx gone from the wood xxx the bird i knew xxx by song alone 
xxxxxx on lookout rock xxx one step xxx to the red hawk 
xxxxxx cajun cabin  xxx the aroma of hot gumbo xxx floats on the bayou 
xxxxxx gunshot! xxx the tide of gulls breaks xxx like a scattering wave 
xxxxxx gathering silence xxx in my mind is xxx the hardest thing to do 
xxxxxx against the wind's chill xxx i button my sweater xxx feet dug in sand 
xxxxxx the sun slips low xxx a carnelian red paving xxx the water with dark light 
xxxxxx how many wanderers xxx have followed the sun xxx down? 
xxxxxx questions xxx purl like schools of fish xxx in dangerous waters 
xxxxxx questions xxx without breath without answers xxx a broken shell 
xxxxxx on the cardboard box xxx holding the frozen wino: xxx fragile: do not crush 
xxxxxx from the fire escape xxx the cry of the mourning dove xxx wintering over 
xxxxxx new condominium xxx its exhaust grate claimed by xxx a new derelict 
xxxxxx wind chill minus five xxx the piercing whistles xxx of the starlings 
xxxxxx the young mother xxx stoops to warm the child's mittens xxx between her gloves 
xxxxxx between lace curtains xxx the white cat's eyes xxx follow a snowflake 
xxxxxx a crow flies down xxx to land in the new snow xxx its voice ringing 
xxxxxx madison avenue xxx a row of ginkgoes mulched xxx with old xmas trees 
xxxxxx suet on a string xxx suspended from a snowy branch xxx three sparrows make it spin 
xxxxxx in the shadow of xxx office buildings, bagpiper's xxx amazing grace 
xxxxxx last nights fading dream  xxx on the blue teapot birds drift xxx beyond the willows 
xxxxxx under cloudless skies; xxx nuclear resister jailed xxx missiles free to fly 
xxxxxx april sun slanting xxx across the exercise yard xxx jail-bar shadows 
xxxxxx basketball stops xxx in the exercise yard xxx convicts shoot the breeze 
xxxxxx this heat! xxx snow-clad mountains framed xxx by my jail cell window 
xxxxxx little ladybug xxx caught after visiting hours: xxx doing jail time, too 
xxxxxx starting a new month xxx in snohomish county jail; xxx same old tea bag 
xxxxxx chilly june morning xxx in a spider web xxx the jailhouse fly hangs 
xxxxxx sixty day jail term xxx as it grows shorter xxx my growing beard 
xxxxxx a swallowtail xxx settles xxx on the prize-winning quilt 
xxxxxx summer afternoon xxx the priest takes a blue pencil xxx from the blind man 
xxxxxx coming up through xxx a gap in the city bridge. . xxx a checkerspot butterfly 
xxxxxx backfire xxx a checkerspot in its sound xxx shifts direction 
xxxxxx dog coming out xxx with the cathedral crowd. . xxx tail upward 
xxxxxx half way home xxx pole shadows reach across xxx the widening road 
xxxxxx train whistle xxx two jets wrap the sky xxx with mist 
xxxxxx a block from home xxx a pair of rain drops find xxx my haiku notes 
xxxxxx snow geese xxx sarah discovers xxx the letter v 
xxxxxx suddenly xxx twenty years later xxx you taste the same 
xxxxxx through two marriages xxx framed behind beethoven xxx your picture 
xxxxxx talking with him xxx i taste you xxx in the tea you serve 
xxxxxx on your porch xxx only the breeze xxx moves between us 
xxxxxx in the dark car xxx the scent of you xxx and the rainy fields 
xxxxxx juice from the apple xxx runs into my beard xxx as i wait for you 
xxxxxx in the mirror xxx the only picture xxx of us together 
xxxxxx your perfume xxx looking up startled xxx at a stranger 
xxxxxx in the cold fireplace xxx my last letter xxx burning 
xxxxxx still in the taste xxx of afternoon tea, xxx my grandmothers brogue 
xxxxxx a horse-drawn plow: xxx sunflowers stand xxx in the traces 
xxxxxx eaves xxx pulling sound xxx from the wind 
xxxxxx walking alone xxx the way oak leaves xxx refuse to fall 
xxxxxx a steady rain xxx the dentists drill xxx turning to snow 
xxxxxx top of the falls xxx your voice somewhere xxx in its sound 
xxxxxx the worm xxx far out on this paved lot xxx more rain 
xxxxxx winter morning xxx the closet dark with xxx old shoes 
xxxxxx the family gathered xxx a tear of embalming fluid runs xxx from my brothers eye 
xxxxxx a moth flies xxx through my breath xxx in moonlight 
xxxxxx bitter wind  xxx the hand that cups the flame xxx aglow 
xxxxxx the sound of scissors xxx through quilt stuffing: xxx chill autumn moon 
xxxxxx autumn maple xxx a gust of yellow scatters xxx the childs laughter 
xxxxxx autumn sky xxx the wind folds and unfolds xxx a flock of sparrows 
xxxxxx moving into the sun xxx the pony takes with him xxx some mountain shadow 
xxxxxx paddling slowly xxx through the reeds xxx that touch her hair 
xxxxxx the old woman xxx looking into the stars xxx sky all snowy 
xxxxxx against his coat xxx i brush my lips xxx the silence of snowflakes 
xxxxxx away from eyes xxx the stairwell holds xxx us in its arms 
xxxxxx that sonofabitch xxx on the corner has a knife xxx the rain glistens on it 
xxxxxx still xxx childless: xxx milkweed 
xxxxxx winters end xxx a bitterness remaining xxx in the dried apricots 
xxxxxx the old garden fence xxx now keeps the goldenrod xxx from the goldenrod 
xxxxxx thin icicles xxx on the telephone wire xxx her distant voice 
xxxxxx hoping the shape xxx of the navel will be good xxx father cuts the cord 
xxxxxx hot rock by the stream xxx each of the babys toeprints xxx evaporating 
xxxxxx single again xxx the woman xxx in my dream 
xxxxxx estate sale xxx the hard xxx erasers 
xxxxxx sacred shrine xxx worshippers raise xxx their selfie sticks 
xxxxxx grass trampled xxx by demonstrators xxx earth day 
xxxxxx independence day parade xxx a child marches xxx in the wrong direction 
xxxxxx sleepless and alone xxx i search for new friends xxx on facebook 
xxxxxx night crossing xxx tijuana border guard xxx in sunglasses 
xxxxxx small town xxx the same dream xxx as last night 
xxxxxx half-empty cup xxx i decide ive had enough xxx of you 
xxxxxx middle age xxx in the mirror xxx the turn toward it 
xxxxxx wedding day xxx the time he takes xxx to knot the tie 
xxxxxx stick figures xxx including one xxx i recognize 
xxxxxx boy girl party xxx the slow speed xxx of the blender 
xxxxxx life and death decisions xxx the need to feel xxx the satin lining 
xxxxxx phantom pain xxx the shape of her xxx in a stranger 
xxxxxx death watch xxx she dies peacefully xxx in their sleep 
xxxxxx rain gauge xxx the pastor talks xxx about grief 
xxxxxx waiting room xxx a fly climbs the stairs xxx on an escher print 
xxxxxx my third glass of wine xxx the mosquito xxx comes back for seconds 
xxxxxx philosophy class xxx i talk myself xxx into a corner 
xxxxxx old faithful xxx the crowd arrives xxx right on time 
xxxxxx father's day, xxx a potato xxx without a face 
xxxxxx stirring my coffee xxx every which way xxx flamenco 
xxxxxx trick-or-treat xxx a sailboat's name xxx reflects in the sea 
xxxxxx martin luther king day xxx i readjust xxx my rear-view mirror 
xxxxxx my skeleton xxx going for a walk xxx in the cemetery 
xxxxxx mother's day xxx she puts me xxx on hold 
xxxxxx the stylist xxx rinses away xxx the sound of her voice 
xxxxxx their first thanksgiving xxx posing together xxx with the turkey 
xxxxxx graduation day xxx in the gait of our son xxx your younger strid 
xxxxxx kona wind xxx an ocean between me xxx and my worries 
xxxxxx new bride xxx the squeak of her xxx sweet corn being shucked 
xxxxxx old timers' game xxx seventh inning stretch xxx the creaking of knees 
xxxxxx street corner memorial xxx my four-year old xxx asks for the balloon 
xxxxxx busy italian restaurant xxx happy birthday xxx sung to the wrong table 
xxxxxx tokyo vending machine xxx the long line xxx behind the foreigner 
xxxxxx old palm reader . . . xxx my life line xxx her longest yet 
xxxxxx engagement ring xxx he decides xxx it looks real enough 
xxxxxx parade march xxx the old vet with canes xxx refuses to ride 
xxxxxx first day of school xxx her brother's backpack xxx with legs 
xxxxxx inviting aromas . . . xxx the hostess asks xxx will it just be me 
xxxxxx our pilot hopes xxx to see us again real soon xxx the intercom clicks 
xxxxxx candlelight dinner xxx she fingers the rose xxx to see it it's real 
xxxxxx stale cookie xxx i give away xxx the fortune 
xxxxxx wrong date xxx the thickening skin xxx on her latte 
xxxxxx a new boyfriend xxx the same lingerie xxx enticing again 
xxxxxx feeling the shape xxx of the wrapped gift xxx i put on a polite face 
xxxxxx first date xxx the little pile xxx of anchovies 
xxxxxx mistaking telephone xxx for doorbell xxx i let loneliness in 
xxxxxx arguing xxx a deaf man grabs xxx the other's hands 
xxxxxx crossing the hopscotch xxx two old women xxx avoid the lines 
xxxxxx dentist's obituary xxx common interests xxx we could never talk about 
xxxxxx as if it were spring xxx the green mold xxx on the cheese 
xxxxxx psychic fair xxx she brushes some dirt xxx from the cards 
xxxxxx centerfold: xxx the model's navel xxx off-center 
xxxxxx day moon xxx a fresh tattoo rises xxx out of her jeans 
xxxxxx independence day xxx i struggle to free myself xxx from a wet swim suit 
xxxxxx fresh blueberries xxx a 'gothic' teenager xxx darkens her lips 
xxxxxx switchbacks xxx five or six cub scouts xxx an octave higher 
xxxxxx my father and i xxx paint the barn xxx compare wars 
xxxxxx picnic xxx in the sun-dappled courtyard xxx my freckled banana 
xxxxxx in the dream xxx my dog has a whistle xxx only i can hear 
xxxxxx rodeo cowboy xxx hopefully clutching xxx a handful of sky 
xxxxxx two-way glass xxx the patient waits inside xxx the therapist's reflection 
xxxxxx rush hour xxx the blonde in the porsche peels xxx an orange 
xxxxxx scar on her cheek xxx she gets her lipstick xxx just right 
xxxxxx grocery shopping xxx his python tattoo xxx squeezes the charmin 
xxxxxx on display: xxx her small and firm xxx opinion of men 
xxxxxx conservatory, xxx the carnivorous plants xxx behind glass 
xxxxxx grinding sausage meat xxx she recounts the times xxx her husband cheated 
xxxxxx aftershock xxx the picture on the wall xxx straightens 
xxxxxx in the middle xxx of making love xxx counting syllables 
xxxxxx nudist camp xxx where to begin xxx with the sunblock 
xxxxxx clothesline xxx the shirt shows off xxx its biceps 
xxxxxx open mike night xxx the audience xxx goes dead 
xxxxxx getting acquainted xxx i learn another name xxx for wild radish 
xxxxxx divorced xxx she cleans the ring xxx around the tub 
xxxxxx after lovemaking xxx returning xxx to ourselves 
xxxxxx nest of black hair xxx secured with ball-point pens xxx office geisha 
xxxxxx naked at the ironing board xxx concentrating xxx on a crease 
xxxxxx round and round xxx debating xxx circumcision 
xxxxxx freezing wind xxx the body builder pumps gas xxx in a muscle shirt 
xxxxxx werewolf movie xxx at the commercial xxx letting the dog out 
xxxxxx winter rain xxx holding the umbrella xxx over the dachshundpissing 
xxxxxx the clerks lip ring xxx i forget xxx what i wanted 
xxxxxx in the midway sun xxx corn on the cob customers xxx grinning ear to ear 
xxxxxx school library xxx such quiet xxx books 
xxxxxx at the fence xxx they sit on their tractors xxx talking hay 
xxxxxx three surgeons xxx five nurses xxx wrong leg 
xxxxxx full moon xxx i iron a wrinkle xxx into his pants 
xxxxxx valentines day xxx she reminds me xxx to fasten my seatbelt 
xxxxxx before the guests arrive xxx i straighten xxx the straight cushions 
xxxxxx a lull in her hands xxx the hairstylist asks xxx how i part my hair 
xxxxxx in one room xxx everything she has xxx and a window 
xxxxxx floating xxx in the dishwater xxx a pair of chopsticks 
xxxxxx serious xxx she takes off her sunglasses xxx to speak english 
xxxxxx nude beach xxx an empty bikini xxx turns me on 
xxxxxx dropping valentine chocolates xxx he quickly swaps them xxx for another box 
xxxxxx leaning back xxx in their chairs xxx old friends reunited 
xxxxxx saving her best dishes xxx for a better day xxx my eighty year old mother 
xxxxxx fireflies xxx my neighbor xxx has more 
xxxxxx blowing out xxx one birthday candle: xxx the whole family 
xxxxxx just married xxx the attendant xxx pumping too much gas 
xxxxxx family reunion xxx everywhere i look xxx my old nose 
xxxxxx identical twins xxx their hair neatly parted xxx on opposite sides 
xxxxxx at the flea market xxx looking through books xxx i gave away 
xxxxxx nightfall xxx the zookeeper xxx lets himself out 
xxxxxx tourist town xxx postcards of the waterfall xxx racked upside down 
xxxxxx carrying their canes xxx two old women lean xxx on each other 
xxxxxx first date xxx in the parking lot xxx our car doors touch 
xxxxxx parents coaxing xxx baby to eat xxx mouths wide open 
xxxxxx handsome vendor xxx my name xxx on a grain of rice 
xxxxxx driving lesson done xxx father and daughter run xxx fingers through their hair 
xxxxxx naked xxx on the bathroom scales xxx stomach held in 
xxxxxx reconciliation xxx the candle between us xxx sputters 
xxxxxx his ashes scattered xxx what to do xxx with the box 
xxxxxx nude beach xxx his enormous xxx sand castle 
xxxxxx letting the dog out xxx letting the dog in xxx wrong dog 
xxxxxx a gusting breeze xxx the comet wobbles xxx in my binoculars 
xxxxxx long walk home xxx kicking a stone xxx for company 
xxxxxx christmas day xxx the exchange xxx of custody 
xxxxxx honeymoon trip xxx he refuses to stop xxx for directions 
xxxxxx clicking off the late movie . . . xxx the couch cushion xxx reinflates 
xxxxxx opening night . . . xxx missing the entrance xxx of the night blooming cereus 
xxxxxx forgetting his underwear xxx the one with so many xxx frequent flier miles 
xxxxxx summer concert xxx fanning myself faster xxx during the scherzo 
xxxxxx overmatched boxer xxx his eyes closed xxx before the fight 
xxxxxx yard sale: xxx she takes the baby crib xxx back into the house 
xxxxxx his toe xxx answers mine xxx a truce begin 
xxxxxx making sure xxx nothing grows xxx the rock gardener 
xxxxxx too quick to reply xxx cutting my tongue xxx on the envelope 
xxxxxx grandfathers funeral xxx cousin kate, air kissing, xxx spies a mirror, checks her makeup. 
xxxxxx in a semi circle xxx retired sisters watch xxx wheel of fortune 
xxxxxx dissatisfied xxx with her virgo horoscope xxx she tries pisces 
xxxxxx first time xxx at the zoo my son xxx watches the people 
xxxxxx antiquities room xxx the curator asks xxx so whats new? 
xxxxxx meeting her boyfriend xxx our handshake xxx out of synch 
xxxxxx from the holy land xxx he sends a postcard of cracks xxx two thousand hears old 
xxxxxx polaroid of her lover xxx coming clearer xxx with time 
xxxxxx visitors day xxx buttons just right xxx her dress inside out 
xxxxxx blueberries xxx we show each other xxx our tongues 
xxxxxx battered child xxx . . . kicking the swing xxx higher 
xxxxxx a pause in the lecture xxx all at once three students xxx cross their legs 
xxxxxx whacking the bat xxx with a broom, she says xxx they attack people 
xxxxxx clear about xxx everything xxx the window washer 
xxxxxx dining out xxx next to the window xxx her coat 
xxxxxx late spring blossoms xxx the silhouette artist facing xxx another ponytail 
xxxxxx balloon man xxx selling pins xxx for popping 
xxxxxx on the same bus xxx the same strangers xxx as yesterday 
xxxxxx new neighbor xxx eyeing the worn path xxx between our houses 
xxxxxx a man swept by xxx in a wave rising, falling xxx sees us see him drown 
xxxxxx fingering my tattoo xxx granddaughter asks xxx when she can have numbers 
xxxxxx the words unspoken . . . xxx waiting for the toast xxx to pop up 
xxxxxx drilling deeper xxx my dentist talks me into xxx amnesty international 
xxxxxx methodical husband: xxx on his list of chores, she finds xxx her name 
xxxxxx running down xxx fight illiteracy xxx the gangs red paint 
xxxxxx drunken sailor xxx loses both shoes xxx tying one on 
xxxxxx eating alone xxx my alphabet soup xxx speaks to me 
xxxxxx lunch xxx with her lovers wife xxx leftovers 
xxxxxx hole in the ozone xxx my bald spot . . . xxx sunburned 
xxxxxx after kindling xxx his passion . . . xxx she lights his cigarette 
xxxxxx nurses station xxx above the heart monitors xxx a soap opera 
xxxxxx how desirable xxx in the thrift shop window xxx my old mag johng set 
xxxxxx hopscotch xxx a one legged man xxx raises cane 
xxxxxx young lawyer xxx his briefs xxx in the snow 
xxxxxx in his mothers house xxx he walks into the cobweb xxx she underlooked 
xxxxxx feel the warmth of xxx bashos frogpond xxx just xeroxed 
xxxxxx behind shadow proof blinds xxx the calligraphers xxx word processor 
xxxxxx cloudless sky xxx the warmth of tomatoes xxx straight from the vine 
xxxxxx my cousin xxx shows me a few grips xxx on his guitar 
xxxxxx silhouettes xxx of totem poles xxx against the rising moon 
xxxxxx regretting her marriage xxx whenever she hears xxx the wild geese call 
xxxxxx the dentist suggests xxx a surgical extraction xxx of wisdom teeth 
xxxxxx a sprinkle xxx of brown sugar melting xxx over oatmeal 
xxxxxx still paranoid xxx even though the weed xxx is now legal 
xxxxxx young lovers xxx unable to keep their hands xxx to themselves 
xxxxxx hard rains xxx reviving xxx a mountain stream 
xxxxxx cherry petals xxx on the soles xxx of a row of shoes 
xxxxxx in the summer heat xxx endless jump shots xxx on a broken hoop 
xxxxxx tea leaves xxx she stirs them xxx for something better 
xxxxxx amber alert xxx one desk xxx empty 
xxxxxx our parrot shrieks xxx my fathers name xxx in my mothers voice 
xxxxxx fathers silhouette xxx cut from the photo xxx his hand still on her shoulder 
xxxxxx millions of stars xxx my father xxx points out a planet 
xxxxxx hours after practice xxx just me and dad xxx hitting into the dark 
xxxxxx cracked tractor seat xxx waiting xxx for papa's return 
xxxxxx bare feet xxx dewy moss xxx between flagstone 
xxxxxx a hay bale xxx in the distance xxx the silent horse 
xxxxxx late winter morning xxx a broken bench xxx alone in the woods 
xxxxxx tinfoil boats xxx down the driveway xxx a child's rainy day 
xxxxxx soon-to-be stepdad xxx blabbers politics xxx looking for my vote 
xxxxxx missing puzzle piece xxx we blame xxx the vacuum 
xxxxxx first day of school xxx eating lunch xxx in the bathroom 
xxxxxx coffee crumble cake xxx my mom xxx brings up grades 
xxxxxx friday morning prayer xxx purple hijabs xxx dance in the wind 
xxxxxx bedtime story xxx only pretending xxx to fall asleep 
xxxxxx napping cat xxx her heart beating xxx on mine 
xxxxxx abandoned trailer park xxx a pink flamingo xxx on the lawn 
xxxxxx after the beach xxx five-day-old sand xxx between my toes 
xxxxxx my grandma xxx watching her pine trees xxx for the last time 
xxxxxx el morro xxx saltwater stinging xxx my sunburned back 
xxxxxx through the teeth xxx of the jack-o-lantern xxx the wind 
xxxxxx family dinner xxx the lights xxx too dim 
xxxxxx late autumn xxx his callused hands xxx feed the line 
xxxxxx autumn wind xxx the spool feeding xxx the thread 
xxxxxx a crack xxx in the parking lot xxx i tightrope to the car 
xxxxxx words xxx come slow like honey xxx ohio rain 
xxxxxx winter dusk xxx the crows xxx clotting the wind 
xxxxxx at the funeral xxx headphones hidden xxx beneath my sweater 
xxxxxx summer waves xxx leave belly button sand xxx in my shower 
xxxxxx rainfall xxx grey sky xxx in big puddles 
xxxxxx night on the lake xxx i touch xxx the moon 
xxxxxx stair of roots xxx i step xxx on each knot 
xxxxxx november sky xxx a lone seed drifts xxx on wispy wings 
xxxxxx august night xxx eau de rain xxx drifts on the wind 
xxxxxx ap physics xxx my eyes xxx twitch 
xxxxxx story time xxx under the covers xxx the night's warm whispers 
xxxxxx autumn rain xxx rinsing the color xxx from the leaves 
xxxxxx cold night xxx the phone call xxx from a disowned sister 
xxxxxx on the window sill xxx next to the box of ashes xxx jiros dog collar 
xxxxxx grandads funeral xxx she wonders xxx whether she looks fat 
xxxxxx under the shade xxx of sunflowers, xxx my mouse decays 
xxxxxx winter night xxx cracks in the floorboards xxx widen 
xxxxxx quiet night xxx the gazebo xxx dressed with snow 
xxxxxx saying goodbye xxx the river flowing xxx one way 
xxxxxx tornado drill xxx the hallways full xxx of laughter 
xxxxxx winter xxx the old mans beard xxx frozen in place 
xxxxxx new snow xxx my footprints xxx follow me 
xxxxxx winter stars xxx my father paints over xxx the old white walls 
xxxxxx autumn night xxx one brick xxx darker than the rest 
xxxxxx first kiss  xxx the tingle of coke xxx down her throat 
xxxxxx scent of spring xxx my sister paints xxx the rising sun 
xxxxxx silent graveyard xxx one tombstone xxx with a crow 
xxxxxx light footsteps xxx across the snow xxx his alcohol breath 
xxxxxx beep of the monitor xxx reminding me . . . xxx to hope 
xxxxxx the wind xxx taking xxx her secret 
xxxxxx early spring xxx the willowy girl xxx runs around the track 
xxxxxx spring morning xxx her jelly shoes dry xxx on the back porch 
xxxxxx empty house xxx echoes of laughter xxx in the rotting wood 
xxxxxx valentines day xxx the stop light stays red xxx too long 
xxxxxx iraqi sun xxx an american soldier xxx pisses in the sand 
xxxxxx new year's day xxx walking in yesterday's xxx frozen footprints 
xxxxxx fireworks xxx a boy nestles xxx into his mother 
xxxxxx the coarse wool xxx of my blanket xxx a cricket's rasp 
xxxxxx grandma's wake xxx my little cousin xxx shakes her etch-a-sketch 
xxxxxx memories xxx caught in my brush xxx long strands 
xxxxxx pre-school xxx a triangle block xxx stuck in a square hole 
xxxxxx harvest moon xxx the homeless man's cup xxx filled with silver 
xxxxxx my father xxx in the stubbled wheat field xxx scratches his beard 
xxxxxx superstitious xxx a fortune cookie xxx seals my fate 
xxxxxx ocean shore xxx lost in a pile of rocks  xxx a seal sleeps 
xxxxxx cold in church xxx mother and i  xxx move closer 
xxxxxx summer cottage xxx the bullfrog  xxx slips my grasp 
xxxxxx shifting shadows  xxx deep in the hills  xxx a dog barks 
xxxxxx metallic taste xxx the cold stream spills xxx from my hand 
xxxxxx koi xxx nibbling xxx my copper wish 
xxxxxx summer breeze xxx the flutter of clothes xxx thrown over a chair 
xxxxxx pebbles underfoot xxx in the cold stream xxx stars 
xxxxxx in front xxx of the meth lab xxx three children hopscotch 
xxxxxx ash wednesday xxx from lines of silent people xxx a cough echoes 
xxxxxx spring evening xxx rain soaks through the newspaper xxx on my head 
xxxxxx hovering xxx over a damp field xxx a cloud of gnats 
xxxxxx dawn xxx dust dances xxx on shafts of sunlight 
xxxxxx summer dusk xxx throwing stones xxx through a broken window 
xxxxxx on an old xxx cemetery stone xxx my name 
xxxxxx mountain stream xxx trout dart xxx around watercress 
xxxxxx monday morning xxx kicking the slush xxx from behind the wheels 
xxxxxx autumn wind xxx rattles the glass xxx a child's breath 
xxxxxx walking xxx the pumpkin patch xxx children's faces aglow 
xxxxxx from the tanning salon xxx to her car xxx january chill 
xxxxxx strep throat xxx she kisses him xxx anyway 
xxxxxx after the dentist appointment xxx sister returns xxx all smiles 
xxxxxx new beau xxx fingering the tattoo xxx with her name 
xxxxxx spring morning xxx the dewy grass xxx holds the shape of her step 
xxxxxx thanksgiving dinner xxx silence, and the xxx pendulum swinging 
xxxxxx a whale's last call xxx the blue sea xxx red 
xxxxxx autumn afternoon xxx hole in the stone wall xxx a perfect frame 
xxxxxx from orion xxx a bat flits xxx to the moon 
xxxxxx mountain view photo xxx capturing xxx the tourist's breath 
xxxxxx farming xxx his hands xxx showing the work 
xxxxxx concentration xxx on the runner's forehead xxx birdpoop 
xxxxxx at the movie xxx their hands meet . . . xxx in the buttered popcorn 
xxxxxx mother's crossed arms xxx a reminder xxx of our argument 
xxxxxx overhead projector xxx the lesson xxx over a student's head 
xxxxxx after the rain xxx so visible xxx the spider's web 
xxxxxx photograph: xxx for a moment xxx everything still 
xxxxxx smiling at him xxx in the old pictures xxx he smiles back 
xxxxxx the quiet girl xxx wearing xxx a loud shirt 
xxxxxx finding myself xxx between the willows xxx autumn evening 
xxxxxx signs of spring xxx tanktop revealing xxx her butterfly tattoo 
xxxxxx leaf pattern xxx arranged xxx rearranged by the wind 
xxxxxx first snow xxx the whole pomegranate xxx one seed at a time 
xxxxxx rain xxx finding xxx the hole in my shoe 
xxxxxx first date xxx her dog xxx likes me 
xxxxxx dark street xxx a lit cigarette xxx moves closer 
xxxxxx halloween xxx my feelings xxx behind a mask 
xxxxxx solitary swimmer xxx ripples xxx the early-morning sun 
xxxxxx old man xxx reeling in xxx the sea 
xxxxxx after the flood xxx our flag waves xxx from the clothesline 
xxxxxx dandelion xxx wished xxx away 
xxxxxx the tree xxx snowcovered xxx except one leaf 
xxxxxx two oak leaves xxx just the same xxx until a brown moth flies away. 
xxxxxx two bold streaks of blue xxx split by the thin horizon xxx ocean and spring sky 
xxxxxx digging potatoes xxx my dog barks xxx at the shovel 
xxxxxx pheasant hunting xxx his hand too cold xxx to pull the trigger 
xxxxxx turning the corner xxx he turns his hat xxx in a different direction 
xxxxxx eucharist xxx white xxx on my dirty palm 
xxxxxx rain . . . xxx he holds out xxx his hands 
xxxxxx grandmother's smile xxx spreads xxx into a yawn 
xxxxxx in the corner xxx of my bedroom xxx in the silent house 
xxxxxx i watch myself xxx walking xxx past the still lake 
xxxxxx emergency room: xxx watching the spider xxx cross the floor 
xxxxxx goodnight embrace xxx by the dusty road xxx all the stars 
xxxxxx earthquake . . . xxx on the chesstable xxx the horse hits the king 
xxxxxx inside the box xxx sits a doll xxx shoeless 
xxxxxx striped fish xxx criss-crossed xxx by a salty net 
xxxxxx indian chant xxx only white men xxx dancing 
xxxxxx silent study hall: xxx my stomach growls xxx anyway 
xxxxxx after his funeral, xxx the white line xxx on her tanned finger. 
xxxxxx i and the dog xxx hunting together xxx the evening mosquitoes. 
xxxxxx out of sight          o xxx ballo    n xxx and the child's smile 
xxxxxx inside its shell xxx a snail xxx and rain . . . 
xxxxxx honorable mention xxx diana stanciu xxx constanta, romania 
xxxxxx butterflies in the air xxx in the herbarium xxx deep silence 
xxxxxx new mother . . . xxx her old cat appears xxx at nursing time 
xxxxxx as the sun rises xxx the flowers open xxx slowly . . . 
xxxxxx blowing out xxx a match xxx the sudden smell 
xxxxxx christmas day xxx the hunters xxx feed the deer 
xxxxxx day after the big test xxx the nurse's office xxx empty 
xxxxxx beautiful girl xxx i turn my head and run xxx the red light 
xxxxxx out of our flavor xxx ice cream man xxx swears in spanish 
xxxxxx mad at myself . . . xxx the ball keeps hitting xxx its own shadow 
xxxxxx beside the waterfall xxx the little girl xxx wets her pants 
xxxxxx light of a million stars . . . xxx still xxx the darkness 
xxxxxx seashells xxx take me xxx from the shore 
xxxxxx he gives me xxx roses xxx and their thorns 
xxxxxx i see his wholeness xxx through the gap xxx in his teeth 
xxxxxx awakened from sleep: xxx cries xxx of my aborted baby 
xxxxxx [top] xxx home | what's new | about the hsa | how to join | society meetings | frogpond | newsletter xxx annual contests | haiku collections | hsa anthology | news | links | contact us 
xxxxxx while you decline to cry, xxx high on the mountainside xxx a single stalk of plumegrass wilts. 
xxxxxx hush, cawing crows; what rackets you make! xxx heaven's indignant messengers, xxx you remind me of wordsmiths! 
xxxxxx onyx, this gem-black night. xxx downcast, i await your return xxx like the morning sun, unrivaled in splendor. 
xxxxxx snow-obscured heights, xxx mist-shrouded slopes: xxx this spring evening. 
xxxxxx an orphaned blossom xxx returning to its bough, somehow? xxx no, a solitary butterfly. 
xxxxxx life: a solitary butterfly xxx swaying unsteadily on a slender stalk of grass, xxx nothing more. but so exquisite! 
xxxxxx fire under the ash xxx and written on the wall xxx the shadow of a friend 
xxxxxx fire levitating ashes: xxx my companion's shadow xxx animates the wall ... 
xxxxxx this darkening autumn: xxx my neighbor, xxx how does he continue? 
xxxxxx autumn darkness xxx descends xxx on this road i travel      alone 
xxxxxx lightning xxx shatters the darkness xxx the night heron's shriek. 
xxxxxx an ancient pond, xxx the frog leaps: xxx the silver plop and gurgle of water. 
xxxxxx a crow settles xxx on a withered branch: xxx autumn nightfall. 
xxxxxx my eyes, xxx having observed everything, xxx returned to the white chrysanthemums. 
xxxxxx a white swan xxx parts the cherry-petalled pond xxx with her motionless breast. 
xxxxxx useless dreams, alas! xxx over desolate fields xxx winds whisper as they pass. 
xxxxxx observe: xxx see how the wild violets bloom xxx within the forbidden fences! 
xxxxxx a kite floats xxx at the same place in the sky xxx where yesterday it floated ... 
xxxxxx oh, magnificent peony, xxx please don't disdain xxx these poor surroundings! 
xxxxxx insolent peony! xxx demanding i measure your span xxx with my fan? 
xxxxxx "this big!" xxx the child's arms xxx measured the peony. 
xxxxxx sing, my sacred tortoiseshell lyre; xxx come, let my words xxx accompany your voice 
xxxxxx dark-bosomed clouds xxx pregnant with heavy thunder ... xxx the water breaks 
xxxxxx the butterfly xxx perfuming its wings xxx fans the orchid 
xxxxxx pausing between clouds xxx the moon rests xxx in the eyes of its beholders 
xxxxxx oh, fallen camellias, xxx if i were you, xxx i'd leap into the torrent! 
xxxxxx eros harrows my heart: xxx a wind on desolate mountains xxx uprooting oaks. 
xxxxxx one apple, alone xxx in the abandoned orchard xxx reddens for winter 
xxxxxx graven images of long-departed gods, xxx dry spiritless leaves: xxx companions of the temple porch 
xxxxxx the temple bells grow silent xxx but the blossoms provide their incense xxx a perfect evening! 
xxxxxx see: whose surviving sons xxx visit the ancestral graves xxx white-bearded, with trembling canes? 
xxxxxx does my soul abide in heaven, or hell? xxx only the sea gull xxx in his high, lonely circuits, may tell. 
xxxxxx i remove my beautiful kimono: xxx its varied braids xxx surround and entwine my body 
xxxxxx this day of chrysanthemums xxx i shake and comb my wet hair, xxx as their petals shed rain 
xxxxxx let us arrange xxx these lovely flowers in the bowl xxx since there's no rice 
xxxxxx the first soft snow: xxx leaves of the awed jonquil xxx bow low 
xxxxxx come, investigate loneliness! xxx a solitary leaf xxx clings to the kiri tree 
xxxxxx the first chill rain: xxx poor monkey, you too could use xxx a woven cape of straw 
xxxxxx like a heavy fragrance xxx snow-flakes settle: xxx lilies on rocks 
xxxxxx the cheerful-chirping cricket xxx contends gray autumn's gay, xxx contemptuous of frost 
xxxxxx whistle on, twilight whippoorwill, xxx solemn evangelist xxx of loneliness 
xxxxxx the year's first day ... xxx thoughts come, and with them, loneliness; xxx dusk approaches. 
xxxxxx an empty road xxx lonelier than abandonment: xxx this autumn evening 
xxxxxx ballet in the air! xxx two butterflies, twice white, xxx meet, mate, unite. 
xxxxxx the cicada's cry xxx contains no hint to foretell xxx how soon it must die. 
xxxxxx fever-felled mid-path xxx my dreams resurrect, to trek xxx through a hollow land 
xxxxxx the sea darkening, xxx the voices of the wild ducks: xxx my mysterious companions! 
xxxxxx will we meet again? xxx here at your flowering grave: xxx two white butterflies 
xxxxxx these wilting summer flowers? xxx the only remains xxx of "invincible" warriors ... 
xxxxxx spring has come: xxx the nameless hill xxx lies shrouded in mist 
xxxxxx among the graffiti xxx one illuminated name: xxx yours. 
xxxxxx a spring wind xxx stirs willow leaves xxx as a butterfly hovers unsteadily. 
xxxxxx swallow flitting in the dusk, xxx please spare my small friends xxx buzzing among the flowers! 
xxxxxx scrawny tomcat! xxx are you starving for fish and mice xxx or pining away for love? 
xxxxxx the moon: glorious its illumination! xxx therefore, we give thanks. xxx dark clouds cast their shadows on our necks. 
xxxxxx curious flower, xxx watching us approach: xxx meet death, our famished donkey. 
xxxxxx ah me, xxx i waste my meager breakfast xxx morning glory gazing! 
xxxxxx right at my feet! xxx when did you arrive here, xxx snail? 
xxxxxx oh, brilliant moon xxx is it true that even you xxx must rush away, as if tardy? 
xxxxxx after killing a spider, xxx i was overcome by loneliness xxx in the bittercold night. 
xxxxxx summer river: xxx ignoring the bridge, xxx my horse charges through the water. 
xxxxxx after the fireworks, xxx the spectators departed: xxx how vast and dark the sky! 
xxxxxx such a small child xxx sent to become a priest: xxx frigid siberia! 
xxxxxx the first morning of autumn: xxx the mirror i investigate xxx reflects my fathers face 
xxxxxx wild geese pass xxx leaving the emptiness of heaven xxx revealed 
xxxxxx silently observing xxx the bottomless mountain lake: xxx water lilies 
xxxxxx cranes xxx flapping ceaselessly xxx test the sky's upper limits 
xxxxxx falling snowflakes' xxx glitter xxx tinsels the sea 
xxxxxx blizzards here on earth, xxx blizzards of stars xxx in the sky 
xxxxxx completely encircled xxx in emerald: xxx the glittering swamp! 
xxxxxx the new calendar!: xxx as if tomorrow xxx is assured ... 
xxxxxx ah butterfly, xxx what dreams do you ply xxx with your beautiful wings? 
xxxxxx because morning glories xxx hold my well-bucket hostage xxx i go begging for water 
xxxxxx spring xxx stirs the clouds xxx in the sky's teabowl 
xxxxxx tonight i saw xxx how the peony crumples xxx in the fire's embers 
xxxxxx it fills me with anger, xxx this moon; it fills me xxx and makes me whole 
xxxxxx war xxx stood at the end of the hall xxx in the long shadows 
xxxxxx because he is slow to wrath, xxx i tackle him, then wring his neck xxx in the long grass 
xxxxxx pale mountain sky: xxx cherry petals play xxx as they tumble earthward 
xxxxxx the frozen moon, xxx the frozen lake: xxx two oval mirrors reflecting each other. 
xxxxxx the bitter winter wind xxx ends here xxx with the frozen sea 
xxxxxx oh, bitter winter wind, xxx why bellow so xxx when there's no leaves to fell? 
xxxxxx winter waves xxx roil xxx their own shadows 
xxxxxx no sky, xxx no land: xxx just snow eternally falling ... 
xxxxxx along with spring leaves xxx my child's teeth xxx take root, blossom 
xxxxxx stillness: xxx a single chestnut leaf glides xxx on brilliant water 
xxxxxx as thunder recedes xxx a lone tree stands illuminated in sunlight: xxx applauded by cicadas 
xxxxxx the snake slipped away xxx but his eyes, having held mine, xxx still stare in the grass 
xxxxxx girls gather sprouts of rice: xxx reflections of the water flicker xxx on the backs of their hats 
xxxxxx the wet nurse xxx paused to consider a bucket of sea urchins xxx then walked away 
xxxxxx may i be with my mother xxx wearing her summer kimono xxx by the morning window 
xxxxxx the moon xxx hovering above the snow-capped mountains xxx rained down hailstones 
xxxxxx oh, dreamlike winter butterfly: xxx a puff of white snow xxx cresting mountains 
xxxxxx spring snow xxx cascades over fences xxx in white waves 
xxxxxx dry leaf flung awry: xxx bright butterfly, xxx goodbye! 
xxxxxx a snake in the grass xxx lies, hissing xxx "trespass!" 
xxxxxx honeysuckle xxx blesses my knuckle xxx with affectionate dew 
xxxxxx my mothers eyes xxx acknowledging my imperfection: xxx dejection 
xxxxxx the whore with the pallid lips xxx lipsticks xxx into something more comfortable 
xxxxxx i am a traveler xxx going nowhere xxx but my how the gawking bystanders stare! 
xxxxxx the moon in decline xxx like my lovers heart xxx lies far beyond mine 
xxxxxx night, xxx the ice and the darkness xxx conspire against human warmth 
xxxxxx late autumn; now all xxx the golden leaves turn black underfoot: xxx soot 
xxxxxx lift up your head xxx dandelion, xxx hear spring roar! 
xxxxxx how will you tidy your hair xxx this near xxx summer? 
xxxxxx leave to each still night xxx your lightest affliction, xxx dandruff. 
xxxxxx soon you will free yourself: xxx one shake xxx of your white mane. 
xxxxxx now there are worlds xxx into which you appear xxx and disappear 
xxxxxx seemingly at will xxx but invariably blown xxx wildly, then still. 
xxxxxx gasp at the bright chill xxx glower xxx of winter. 
xxxxxx icicles splinter; xxx sleep still an hour, xxx till, resurrected in power, 
xxxxxx in the lantern light  xxx white are the tea plant blossoms  xxx by the path at night. 
xxxxxx a little village here  xxx is sleeping, lulled by crickets  xxx chirping sweet and clear. 
xxxxxx oh, how small, my sweet,  xxx is your painted parasol  xxx in this intense heat! 
xxxxxx in the twilight gloom  xxx of the redwood and the pine  xxx some wisterias bloom. 
xxxxxx oh, how quietly  xxx and how still the heavy snow  xxx fades into the sea! 
xxxxxx soothed by the serene xxx balminess of spring, i fell xxx asleep on the green. 
xxxxxx spring hills disappear xxx sinking into the pine grove xxx as i wander near. 
xxxxxx some one from below xxx is looking at the whirling xxx of the cherry snow. 
xxxxxx through the pampas grass xxx that sways and dances gently xxx in the breeze, i pass. 
xxxxxx piercing crimson red  xxx is the autumn setting sun  xxx on the cockscomb head! 
xxxxxx chestnut gatherers? xxx they inquired in return  xxx when we asked the way. 
xxxxxx the snows are falling;  xxx and far into the distance  xxx meiji has gone. 
xxxxxx deep within the dale  xxx wrapped in veils of evening mist,  xxx sings the nightingale. 
xxxxxx in the morn i go  xxx stepping over the bamboo  xxx broken by the snow. 
xxxxxx night begins to come,  xxx and the darkness falls at once  xxx in the grove of plum. 
xxxxxx the dancing rings become xxx larger and larger to the beat xxx of the quickening drum. 
xxxxxx with a rustling sound xxx fallen leaves pursue and pass xxx others on the ground. 
xxxxxx brushing the leaves, fell xxx a white camellia blossom xxx into the dark well. 
xxxxxx luminous and cool xxx is the way a pebble sinks xxx iuto the blue pool. 
xxxxxx shadows from the hills  xxx lengthen half across a field  xxx of gold daffodils. 
xxxxxx tenderly again  xxx on the peony i hear  xxx whispers of the rain. 
xxxxxx cast by morning light,  xxx the stamens shadow is black  xxx on the calla white. 
xxxxxx a lizard flicks over  xxx the undulating ripples  xxx of sunlit clover. 
xxxxxx in moonlight, half-hid  xxx by the silhouettes of leaves  xxx twits the katydid. 
xxxxxx a crimson dragonfly,  xxx as it lights, sways together  xxx with a leaf of rye. 
xxxxxx a crimson dragonfly,  xxx glancing the water, casts rings  xxx as it passes by. 
xxxxxx flowered is her hem,  xxx ankle-deep in daffodils  xxx as she gathers them. 
xxxxxx here at parting now,  xxx let me speak by breaking  xxx a lilac from the bough. 
xxxxxx the shadow of the trees  xxx almost reaches to my desk  xxx with the summer breeze. 
xxxxxx i drinklistening  xxx to the sound of the water  xxx rising from the spring. 
xxxxxx hurriedly runs rain  xxx toward the sunlit grain field,  xxx half across the plain. 
xxxxxx against the black sky  xxx the lightning paints the great oak  xxx as it flashes by. 
xxxxxx under the low grey  xxx winter skies water pushes  xxx water on its way. 
xxxxxx underneath the eaves  xxx a blooming large hydrangea  xxx overbrims its leaves. 
xxxxxx broken, broken, yet  xxx perfect is the harvest moon  xxx in the rivulet. 
xxxxxx white swans, one or two,  xxx drew near, pushing the water  xxx for the food i threw. 
xxxxxx with the mattock i  xxx dig the garden where the clouds  xxx shadow passes by. 
xxxxxx moving in one big sway  xxx the flowering winter peony  xxx scatters bright and gay. 
xxxxxx 